How to Be Better at Almost Everything
This book is dedicated to my grandfather, John Jones, and my grandmother,
Jacqueline Jones—aka “D-Dop” and “D-Dom.”CONTENTS
Introduction:
Why Skill Stacking > Specialization
CHAPTER 1: When Great Is the Enemy of Good
CHAPTER 2: Gaining Your Freedom for Excellence (And the Right
to Choose . . . Wrongly If Necessary)
CHAPTER 3: Becoming an Expert Generalist: Five Key Principles
CHAPTER 4: How to Practice Better and Improve Faster
CHAPTER 5: Where to Begin: Metaskills
CHAPTER 6: Skills You May Be Interested In (But May Not Need)
CHAPTER 7: Skills You May Need (But May Not Be Interested In)
Conclusion: Remember, Life Is Best with a Sense of Perspective
Acknowledgments
Appendix: Profiles in Generalism
About the AuthorINTRODUCTION: WHY SKILL
STACKING > SPECIALIZATION
Y
ou don’t have to be the best in the world to get ahead. You don’t need
to be number one to see the limelight, strike it rich, or find meaning in life.
You only need to be good or great—or at least fairly competent—at a few
things and then combine those things to foster that uttermost creative
quality within yourself. Specialization—a goal that has been instilled into
most of us from an early age—is a snare that has entrapped people for long
enough. This book is about to put an end to that.
I don’t intend to teach you, step-by-step, some new way of starting a
business. I want to teach you, one step at a time, a new way of learning and
acquiring skills that you can use (if you so choose) to start a business, and
thus give you a much better chance of not finding but creating success.
People can take businesses away from you, and so can a bad economy. But
no one can rob you of skills, unless they rob you of life, which just
wouldn’t be very nice. You don’t need to be born with special DNA for this
book to work. You only need to be willing to learn.
If you’re looking for a mega-inspirational story, you won’t find that in
much of what I’m about to tell you. But if you’d like to read about a person
who came to earth without any special inborn ability, someone who
overcame a lifelong battle with neuroses and went on to acquire skills
anyway, someone who turned sharply away from the conventional
trajectory in life toward building a line of successful businesses—becoming
a writer, a musician, a black belt, a B-level fitness celebrity, and a whole lot
of other seemingly unrelated but pretty cool things that all merged
dynamically into one another—then you’ll probably want to read this.This book is about generalism. Our goal is to become better than most
people at most things, even if we aren’t the best at any one skill. Why do we
want to do this? Well, the first thing I would say is that, at the very least,
being a generalist makes you a lot less boring to be around. To be great at
many things is, frankly, a quality that very few people have. Most people
are somewhat OK at one or two things and then either completely
incompetent or downright terrible at everything else; they typically can’t
even do simple things like keeping a houseplant alive. Not that I would
know myself how difficult that is, since the only plant I ever owned was
stolen by my college roommate, who thought it was marijuana of some kind
—only the joke was on him because that’s not what it was. It was just a
totally regular plant that my mom got me. And I knew my roommate was
the person who stole it because one day it just magically appeared on his
side of the room. Would you look at that? I thought. I wonder what’s going
on here. So I said, “Yo, dude, did you steal my plant or what?” Then he told
me to relax, so I was like, Whatever man, that plant isn’t what you think.
And then I got over it. Because that’s how life is: you get over things.
Lesson number one.
Second, if you have any interest in running or starting a business, then
being able to stack a variety of skills is a thousand times more powerful
than trying to be the best at just one. We call this skill stacking: combining
skills in a unique and useful way, which gives you more breadth and
versatility than someone who specializes in one thing. This is something I
plan to teach a lot about, so please make yourself comfortable.
Finally, because happiness, as the philosophers will tell us (philosophers
like Aristotle and Thomas Aquinas, anyway—I’m not talking about the
hedonists here), involves engaging in and enjoying a genuinely good
activity, it seems our fulfillment is found not in what we accumulate but
rather in what we endeavor to do. In other words, skills are good because
they give us something good to engage in, and we all need that.
So to put it all together, this book is about becoming good or great at
many things and at least fairly competent at (almost) everything else, and
then learning to combine abilities to form a competitive advantage while at
the same time finding total and complete fulfilment in life. Not too heavy of
an assignment, right? The secret to all of it? Skill stacking. (Yay!) The
enemy? Specialization. (Boo!)Mostly, I want to teach you how to get better at getting better at things
—the skill of acquiring skill so you can build a reputation and a thriving
business (if you so choose) with all the skills you never had and never
thought you needed to have. The problem, as I see it, is that since most self-
help books these days are about topics like finding confidence when you’re
semi-overweight or marketing yourself on social media, nobody’s thought
to teach you these inclusive skills. And while I’m all for finding confidence
when you’re semi-overweight (I used to be one such person; we’ll talk
about that in a bit) and marketing yourself on social media, those types of
skills have little to do with being happy and successful on the most
fundamental level.
Happiness is a skill; business is a skill. I’m going to teach you how to
get the skills you need and then how to combine those skills to find your
competitive streak and creative spirit. Am I a super creative person? Well, I
should like to think I’m at least somewhat creative. I draw things, I record
music, and I write. I even entered a video game tournament once. I didn’t
do half bad. I won the first round, anyway. But the reason I’m creative (if
I’m creative at all) is that I’m a generalist. I’m somebody who got good at
many things and then found a way to pull them together to come up with
ideas for (and this always sounds somewhat self-aggrandizing when I say it
like this) making money and, even more important, having a pretty fun time
doing it. I only say “pretty fun” because there were one or two times that
didn’t go quite as well as I had hoped. I’ll get over it. (You know what, it is
hard being me. Thank you for saying that. No, really. It means more than
you know. Here, let’s sit and maintain eye contact.)
So this is the way this book will work: First (I like numbering things; it
keeps me organized), I’ll talk about generalism, the principles behind it, and
why I think this philosophy can help you (or anyone) find success and
happiness by doing the things you love and making money from them.
Doesn’t that sound nice? I think that sounds nice. Second, I’ll talk about
skill stacking and why it’s more effective for being an entrepreneur (and
human) than specialization, or trying to be “the best” at just one thing.
Third, I’ll talk about how to get better at anything that interests you through
a series of principles that makes learning new skills forty million times
easier; I’ll also share with you the skills I think (almost) every person needs
to start getting ahead both financially and figuratively. And don’t worry: it’snot like any of these skills take all that long to develop. It’s just that most
people never think to develop them. Finally, we’ll talk about how to
actually build a skill stack and put all your newfound talents to work in
attaining the good life—ah yes, the good life—because it wouldn’t be a
self-help book without talking about that.
Along the way, we’ll discuss some well-known people who used this
philosophy of generalism—case studies, you could say, of those who
became good or great at many things to find success and meaning and
fulfillment. (You’ll also find more of these, additional opportunities to see
generalism in action, in the appendix.) People like George Washington
Carver, whom I did a book report on in third grade, just so you know a little
about my credentials. For example, George Washington Carver was more
than just an innovator with the peanut and the sweet potato. He was also
well known for his advocacy of a proper understanding of the relationship
between faith and science; in addition, he was a strong, original proponent
of environmentalism while, at the same time, offering advice to business
leaders and establishing outreach programs. The man did a lot because he
was capable of a lot, and he had a huge heart. He was even a competent
painter. I’ll also mention several contemporary figures along the way, which
is my way of saying people who aren’t quite so, well, dead.
As I said, my goal isn’t to teach you step-by-step some new way of
starting a business, because that, I think, would be boring. My goal is to
teach you principle by principle how to become better at (almost)
everything and then help you figure out what skills you may need to do all
the things you want in life.
I get that this book may be saying some peculiar things and that you
probably think I’m somewhat peculiar as well, but trust me when I say I’m
on to something and that specialization is not the way to go in life. So many
people are still so preoccupied with trying to become the best at just one
thing, but the greatest opportunities present themselves to those who are
preoccupied not with excelling at one skill but with being just good enough
at the right combination of abilities.
Perhaps the greatest feature of generalism is that you don’t need to have
any sort of genetic head start. You don’t need a perfectly groomed set of
eyebrows, or a strong pair of arms, or a fast set of legs; you can just be
whoever you are and that’s enough—this philosophy is all very “MisterRogers.” And since you’re not trying to be the best in the world at one
particular thing, you don’t have to be the best in the world at anything. You
can just be you and I can just be me, and that’s more than adequate because
anybody can get better at (almost) everything. I’m not saying the world
doesn’t need specialists like Usain Bolt or Michael Phelps or whoever
designs microchips for NASA, but I am saying I was never going to be that
good and (not to sound insulting) I doubt you were either, and that’s fine
because most people shouldn’t be specialists to begin with. That’s why we
have generalism.
It’s not that specialization is unimportant; it’s just that so many people
think that it’s way more important than it is or that specializing is the only
way to get ahead in life, when they’d be better off focusing on breadth, as
much as depth, of skill. Generalism allows people the freedom to become
moderately skilled at a number of different things and then to put these
skills on top of each other to sneak ahead, because “the competition,” God
bless ’em, never thought the game could be played in such a way.
So that’s what we’re going to do. If you’re reading this book you may
already know a little bit about me. Or maybe you don’t. But that’s where
I’m going to start because, believe it or not, I know a lot about me. And,
you’ll see, a lot of it is going to apply to you.Chapter One
WHEN GREAT IS THE ENEMY OF
GOOD
I
t’s not like the idea of generalism just occurred to me. It’s something I
had to figure out after going a long time in the opposite direction. Like
many of us, when I was a kid, I thought I should grow up to be the best at
something—and for me that something was the guitar. I wanted to be the
fastest and most virtuosic guitarist around, so I could become famous, get
tattoos, and do drugs and all that. Obviously, this isn’t how things turned
out. Here’s why.
First, I have maintained a healthy paranoia regarding substance abuse,
because with a family history of addiction problems, I know very well what
I might end up like. I also maintain an unhealthy fear of needles in general
and have way too much of an indecision problem to settle on something as
permanent as a tattoo. Plus, I don’t care all that much about becoming
famous anymore, for reasons we’ll later get into.
Those, ahem, lofty goals aside, I realized about five years into playing
guitar that specialization wasn’t getting me to the places I wanted to go. By
the time I was in high school, I was (in my opinion) the best guitarist
around, but only a few people enjoyed hearing me play, since I only played
stuff that other guitarists wanted to listen to, like sweep-picking guitar
solos. (For nonmusicians, an example of sweep picking can be heard quite
prominently throughout the work of virtuoso guitarists from the 1980s, like
Yngwie Malmsteen; check out “Arpeggios from Hell.”) Because—and this
is something every specialist eventually realizes—there comes a point inevery skill when you become so good you suddenly lose people on a
common level and begin appealing only to other specialists, and that’s when
you know you’ve gone too far. Most people in my high school didn’t want
to hear virtuosic guitar solos; they just wanted to be asked to the prom by
some singer-songwriter kid with a Dave Matthews haircut. So it would have
been better if I hadn’t spent so much time perfecting sweep picking and
instead had gotten just a little better at singing. This was a clear case of
where a skill stack (singing and playing the guitar) was more attractive than
specialization (being a solo guitarist), because if the goal was to get
attention as a person/musician, it was the generalist (in this case, my
“friend” Tom) who was doing so, and not the specialist (me), who might
every once in a while impress people with a fiery guitar solo but could not
write a catchy melody. And since most people are basically philistines when
it comes to this stuff—they don’t care for all that technical mumbo jumbo—
they just want a tune they can hum along to.
That was lesson number one, in which somebody who was not as good
at the guitar as me was getting the thing that I wanted out of being a
guitarist, which was having people say how good a guitarist he was, when
everybody should have been saying how good a guitar player I was. But
how would they know that, since none of them were musicians? As you can
imagine, all this made me somewhat displeased.
So specialists mostly appeal to other specialists—I got it then. But this
was also not the only case where I was the person who was better at
something yet not doing quite as well on the, let’s call it, commercial level.
Yes, I was (in my opinion) the best guitarist in my high school, but that
hardly says anything, since there were only about ten kids in my high
school who even played the guitar to begin with—it’s not like I had all that
much competition living in rural Wisconsin. It wasn’t until I began
auditioning for college that I realized how ordinary my abilities were, even
as a so-called specialist. This was lesson number two: not only had
specialization not gotten me to where I wanted to be in life, but even with
practicing seven hours a day, I still sucked. I didn’t “suck suck”; I just
“sucked” in the sense like, wow, really? All these years and I’m still not
even close to being nearly as good as I thought? That’s a bummer. Because
there I was, practicing every waking moment on that bastard of aninstrument, and I got my ass handed to me by some twelve-year-old Korean
kid in an audition for Berklee. That literally happened.
So lesson number three was waking up to the grim reality of diminished
returns and how little I got back for every additional hour I dedicated to
getting better at the guitar, when I could have gotten so much more in return
if I’d merely invested that time in other skills like singing, songwriting, or
producing. I still would have gotten shown up on a technical level by that
kid at Berklee, but that was going to happen anyway. Even if I’d decided to
increase my practice by seven more hours per day, I seriously doubt I would
ever have gotten to be as good as he was. Maybe he simply had connections
in his brain that never formed for me because he started playing guitar when
he was two but I didn’t get started until I was in eighth grade. Or maybe he
was just smarter than me. That is also possible.
One problem with specialization is that success is too often dependent
on factors beyond your control, like who your parents were, where you
were born, how you were raised, what you look like, and so on. The good
news is that generalism doesn’t rely on any of that, so it doesn’t matter if
your parents were models or meth addicts, and it doesn’t matter if you have
any skill at all. You can be a total loser and still succeed. I did.
But if I’m going to impart to you any wisdom at all, it’s probably best to
tell you a little bit about my own journey from being a specialist (and not
succeeding) to becoming a generalist and doing fairly well for myself, all
things considered.
As you probably gathered (and we’ll return to it), I started out wanting
to be a guitar player. I practiced my calluses off, striving to become the best
guitarist in the world, even though I know now that was never going to
happen. But the things I learned by acquiring that skill have been super
important and eventually helped me become a writer, business owner, and
entrepreneur.
Now, since we’re already such good friends, I’ll let you in on this.
Sometime around ninth grade, my buddies asked me to participate in a wet
T-shirt contest to see who had bigger man boobs—me or my friend Sean.
I’m sorry to have to report this, but it was about the only competition I won
in high school, though the upside was that it inspired me to start getting in
shape. So after being humiliated in front of everyone whose opinion I cared
about, I began reading a bunch of books on dieting and exercise, andeventually I signed up for tae kwon do, where I got into strength training
and kettlebells. What are kettlebells? They’re a form of weights that sort of
look like cannonballs with a handle on them. Don’t worry about that now.
We’ll come back to it.
In the meantime, I experienced a lot of panic attacks and went through a
period of agoraphobia when I felt like I couldn’t leave my house without a
chaperone and a lucky charm of some kind. I’m not going to sugarcoat this:
life pretty much sucked at this point. And that’s probably where I bottomed
out. High school is tough for a lot of kids, right?
Through tae kwon do, I learned about meditation and started to get a
hold of myself. In 2006 or 2007, while I was still in high school, I decided
to start a YouTube channel and a blog to talk about getting in shape, and
lifting weights, and meditation, and pretty much everything else I was
interested in. I wanted to help others because I was starting to feel a lot of
benefits from consistently working out, and my life was changing in some
positive ways.
I was thrilled to be accepted into school for music, except my
grandmother (isn’t that a grandmother’s job?) talked me into getting a “real
degree” in economics and finance. But I continued to blog, and I put up a
lot of information about exercise and my personal struggles with weight and
anxiety.
People responded to that and saw me as someone to whom they could
relate, someone, they said, who is often helpful and sometimes funny. And
about my second year in, I realized I could maybe do this for a living—that
is, fitness. At first I was doubtful, because I thought back to how I never
made it as a guitarist, even though I practiced more than anyone (or so I
thought), and I looked at my fitness levels and admitted I was nowhere near
the most in-shape person in the world. I realized I was never going to be the
strongest or the biggest or the best at anything. But I knew I could become
fit in a very general way—lean and strong and muscular and flexible. I
could balance on my hands and do muscle-ups and lift heavy things. And
that impressed people: they saw that I was good at many things, and they
wanted to know how I did it.
Also, because I wasn’t specializing, I didn’t get hurt as much as
everyone else—the friends who were bodybuilding or powerlifting anddriving themselves to the breaking point in their training would get injured
and lose interest.
So there I was, also writing my blog and making videos for YouTube,
meditating a lot, and practicing tae kwon do. It was really centering me.
People also began complimenting me on my writing, so I took that as an
invitation to study writing more deeply and to learn how to be a good
communicator and craft prose in a way that is casual and accessible. People
were following my blog, they said, not only to learn about generalism and
fitness but to enjoy my storytelling and all the outrageous things I had to
say. So that was neat.
This was an epiphany of sorts, though a very gradual one, whereby I
began to see the value in a skill stack, in which the combination of my
fitness abilities and my writing skills—even though I was far from being
the best at either—seemed to be intriguing when put together. It was like a
sandwich: even if all the ingredients aren’t amazing themselves, they still
taste pretty good when mushed together. Eventually I realized that I never
needed to specialize. I never needed to be the best piece of pastrami: I just
needed to be good enough pastrami and then have some bread and
sauerkraut and creamy-enough dressing. I had almost no direct competition
because most of the people I was up against in the fitness industry weren’t
writers, and most writers weren’t in the fitness industry.
Come my senior year of college, I fell into my first big book deal
because one of my followers was looking for someone to write a book
about fitness. I got the deal and even did a pretty darned good job with that
book (or so the publisher said), so it led to a series. And along the way, I
learned a lot about marketing and business and sales. I learned about
psychology and philosophy as well, and I studied all of it with furious
interest so I could start to make a living based on everything I was doing.
Up until that point, I had done a fine job at getting attention but almost
nothing to make any money from it. I began to spend a lot of time with
business mentors, and I went to conferences to have my mind exploded by
people who made more money than I even knew existed. And all of that
added to my skill stack, by the way.
So back to my grandmother’s advice—or not, as the case may be. While
this was all happening, I was still in school studying economics and
finance. I said to my adviser, “Hey listen, so I’ve got these books I have towrite, and I’m running a business, and I was just wondering if instead of
taking that last free elective, I could have a couple of ‘life credits,’ let’s call
them.” Well, long story just a little less long, he had no idea what I was
talking about, and I eventually dropped out.
And that, too, became part of my message, because as my business
grew, people began asking me where I went to school, assuming I must
have degrees in all of this. But I relished showing that college is not
necessary to be successful. Education is a good thing. But you can get that
from books and coaches and mentors.
The funny thing, however, is that I have been offered the opportunity to
go back to school for philosophy (which I’m working on now) because one
of my followers happens to be a professor at this most adorable little
university, and he’s hoping I’ll have a better experience as a grad student.
OK, sure, why not? We’ll see how that goes.
The point of this is that eventually you do indeed become the person
you want to be, even if you don’t think it’s in the way that you want. You
become somebody who is successful and productive and useful, but not by
being the best you hoped to be—in my case, with the guitar. You become a
generalist, and that’s how it happens. It’s the accumulation of all these
different skills that sets you apart; it’s how you manage to weave them all
together in a (at first) haphazard but (eventually) deliberate way that makes
your existence enchanted. Lessons you learn in one area apply to what
you’re doing in another area, and the other way around, and no skill you
ever learn remains completely unused. Everything is connected, and
everything comes into play eventually.
So don’t throw anything away, because good things are going to come
from everything you’re doing or will be doing. Your skills may all very
soon coalesce, and you’ll have money and C-level fame. But here’s the
thing I want to leave you with: if you’re not something without the C-level
fame, then you’re not something with the C-level fame. No amount of
commercial success is ever going to make you happy.
The last set of skills we need to talk about here are character traits.
Because self-improvement isn’t about getting things; it’s about becoming
someone, and the someone worth becoming is a person who cares about not
what they get but rather what they create. The “getting” should be just a by-
product of doing decent work. Your concern should be focused on whetheryou’re putting things into the world that people benefit from and enjoy
using, and another concern should be whether people like being around you
—so it’s not just about what you create but also about the kind of person
you are because of what you create. For now, all I want you to know is that
everything works out OK in the end—well, at least it has so far for me. Life
is hard. Writing is hard. Everything is hard. But eventually you find
meaning in all of what you do because you discover that happiness is found
by engaging in good activities, and that’s what being a generalist is—it
brought me to where I am today, which is a lot better than where I was a
decade ago.
Now you know my little autobiography (though, trust me, you’ll find
out a lot more). Let’s talk a bit about freedom.Chapter Two
GAINING YOUR FREEDOM FOR
EXCELLENCE (AND THE RIGHT
TO CHOOSE . . . WRONGLY IF
NECESSARY)
I
n late high school and early college, I went through something of a
libertarian phase, when I became super skeptical about everything.
Essentially, I was Snake from Escape from New York, whose answer to all
the world’s problems was “Listen fella, I don’t give a fuck about your war
or your president.” This isn’t the most productive attitude a person can
have, but I did get at least one thing out of it, which was an appreciation for
human freedom. But as I became older and (hopefully) wiser and came to
see the good in people, I realized there was this whole other kind of
freedom I hadn’t previously appreciated.
The libertarian cares about people’s ability to do what they want without
interference from some tyrant or some other power. That’s called freedom
of indifference—or autonomous self-direction, if you like. But the other
kind of freedom—the freedom that’s particular to generalism—is the
freedom of self-expression. And that’s just the ability to do things because
you’ve gained the ability to do them.
The libertarian is right to say that freedom of in-difference is important
because, yeah, you shouldn’t enslave people—that’s not a good thing.
Slavery, bad. Everyone agree? But at the same time, the libertarian is
incorrect to think that freedom of indifference is all people need for a happylife, because there’s really no assurance that just because people are free,
they’ll make the most of themselves. Obviously, we can see this, because
we live in a country with large amounts of freedom and yet large numbers
of people feel their lives haven’t amounted to much of anything.
Thus, it seems that freedom of indifference is necessary but is not, in
itself, a sufficient means for happiness. Obviously, we need the ability to
make decisions for ourselves in order to make the right decisions for
ourselves, but just because we have the ability to make our own decisions
doesn’t mean we will make the right decisions. We might make the wrong
decisions for ourselves. So that’s not good.
I don’t want to make a philosophical treatise of this, but ultimately
here’s what I’m trying to say: there’s this second kind of freedom outside
freedom of indifference that is more essentially tied to happiness, and that
freedom is called freedom for excellence. The secret to finding freedom for
excellence comes from living life in a way that does not center around
simply doing whatever you want. If I were to put it more bluntly, I would
say freedom for excellence is more about fighting tyrants from within, and
freedom of indifference is more about fighting tyrants from without.
For example, I’m only free to express myself as a musician after I
develop my abilities on a musical instrument, but I can’t develop those
abilities unless I’m determined to follow a set of rules and practice habits.
It’s only by limiting my freedom in one sense that I can enhance it in
another; it’s only by giving up the freedom to not practice the guitar (or
practice the guitar however I please) that I can practice the guitar in a way
that’s effective, which eventually grants me the freedom to express myself
through the instrument.
This is freedom of indifference: you don’t tell me what to do, I won’t
tell you what to do, and we’ll all just get along. Again, there’s something to
this. It’s the stuff all good constitutions are made of. But then there’s this
other kind of freedom that says: “Hey look, man, it’s great you don’t want
to be anybody’s personal minion—I’m with ya there—but do you really
think just doing whatever you want is going to lead to a happy existence?”
Actually, dude, this is what I would tell that person: “It’s often better to take
options away, so long as you’re removing those options yourself.”
Because here’s freedom for excellence: this is the freedom that comes
from restriction.Freedom for excellence isn’t about being able to move in this or that
direction like in the notion of autonomous self-direction; it’s about having
the power to pursue whatever skills you think are worth having and
developing the discipline to say no to all the things that are distracting you
from your life’s purpose. It’s about making the decisions that any perfectly
rational person with all available information about future outcomes would
make, which is impossible since none of us are that rational, and none of us
can see into the future—but it’s still a worthy exercise. Freedom for
excellence can be thought of as the discipline of desires to make the good at
first possible, and then effortless. And to me that sounds a lot like
somebody who wants to get better at things.
The point of having freedom is not so you can squander it but so you
can make the most of it—and yourself. So you’re going to have to learn to
make some hard decisions. You’re going to have to learn to put off what’s
easy for what’s important. You’re going to have to live as if you are not free
—as if you are a slave to good habits and effective behavior. Ultimately
you’re going to have to learn to impose restrictions and practice habits so
you don’t abuse the freedom God gave you.
I’m not saying you can’t choose to live the way you want; I’m only
saying that with freedom comes the ability to choose wrongly, and with that
comes consequences you might not be comfortable living with for the rest
of your life. If you continue to gorge on junk food, you’re going to wind up
fifty pounds overweight—and maybe someday two hundred pounds
overweight, and you won’t be able to get around on your own two feet.
How much freedom will you have then? So you should know that freedom
is not found in unhealthiness—only oppression is.
But turn that around a minute. Because imagine you start working out
and lifting weights and getting in shape. Imagine you work up the ability to
do push-ups and pullups and handstands, and instead of teasing you, people
admire what you can do, because that’s a certain kind of freedom too—it’s
just not the kind of freedom people think of. But it is the kind of freedom
that people want, even if they don’t always consider it—people want the
ability to do things and the freedom to express themselves. But how are you
going to express yourself through abilities you don’t have?
For example, you’re free to play the guitar when you learn your scales
and modes and chords. Just like you’re free to speak French when you’vestudied the pronunciation and grammar of the language. You’re free to do
pull-ups only after you become more fit and gain strength, all of which
comes from discipline. This is freedom of excellence. Freedom of
indifference is the freedom to choose otherwise.
Maybe you grew up getting pretty much everything you wanted and
were allowed whatever you wanted, and you took that freedom for granted.
And if you take freedom of indifference for granted, why on earth would
you give any thought to freedom for excellence? Isn’t that how it always
just seems to go? It’s not until you’re at the point of losing something
forever that you suddenly beg and plead and make whatever bargain you
can to hold on to it. Think about what happens if you let time slip away and
take for granted all this freedom but don’t do a single damn thing about it.
Think about how much freedom you have, but also how much you don’t
have because you aren’t getting better at anything; think of all the freedom
that’s left on the table, so to speak. All of us have a certain amount of
freedom given to us (freedom of indifference), which is mostly luck of the
draw, but so much more freedom is available to us (freedom for excellence),
which is earned if we’re willing to apply just a bit of consistency and effort.
To bring it all together, I would say (again) that freedom of indifference
is a necessary but not sufficient means for freedom for excellence, and that
every government should secure for its people that first freedom so they can
attain some of the second. On the other hand, no government has any
business getting into our lives and telling us how to be happy because no
government could ever possibly know what happiness for all its citizens is
—that’s really something for enlightened philosophers like the author of
this book to figure out.
All of this, of course, is building to a much bigger point, which is how
becoming a generalist can make us not just successful but happy. I believe
we all have every right to pursue happiness, but we have no right to expect
happiness just because we live and breathe. Because happiness is not
something somebody can give us, and that includes our parents, our spouse,
and the president. Happiness is what happens when we engage in good
activities, so happiness is not only a habit but an act. Happiness is not an
outcome; it’s a deed. It’s not like we do one thing like get married or make a
million bucks and suddenly we’re happy and that’s it. That’s not whathappiness is. Happiness is a state of mind that’s produced over time by
doing good things.
Aristotle said the point of humans is to know things, make things, and
do things. He said that because humans are rational animals, their goal in
life is to seek “the good,” and the good, according to Aristotle, is anything
that is spiritually, physically, or mentally productive. Without getting too far
ahead of ourselves, Aristotle (and later on, Thomas Aquinas) said the
highest good is God, but there are also plenty of other good things on the
way to God like art and engineering and pretty much everything God made
and wanted us to engage in.
This is where becoming a generalist is important, because if happiness
is knowing and making and doing good things, then it certainly stands to
reason that we can increase our happiness by engaging in many activities,
not just one. And here it’s important to note that our engagement in
genuinely good activities is not just about the accomplishment of the
activity itself but also about the kind of character we develop because of the
things we’re involved in and the reasons why. In other words, by doing
good things and—importantly—doing them for the right reasons, we
become genuinely good people.
The reason I’m spending so much time laying out the philosophy of
happiness is that before we get into any deeper principles of generalism, we
need something to orient us so that we actually get better at the things that
are worth getting better at, for reasons that align with finding happiness.
You mustn’t fall into the trap of pursuing things only because you’re a
megalomaniac (all of us are at risk of becoming megalomaniacs, if we’re
not careful); if you do so, no matter how many things you get better at,
you’ll always be sour and resentful and never feel fulfilled. You’ll become
that person with a monocle and a cigar who is incessantly on a quest for
power and never satisfied and always finding someone to blame for his
inadequacies. I call this person Charles. Charles is the opposite of Brett, the
guy with a skullet and an eye patch who lives out of his SUV. As far as we
can help it, we want to avoid becoming either Charles or Brett. Charles
applies discipline but in the wrong direction. Brett does only the minimum
he needs to get by. Both are missing out on the meaning of life.
Obviously, a big part of this book is about making money doing what
you love and improving the skills you need to make that happen. But there’salso no reason why this can’t and shouldn’t itself be a genuinely good
activity that both pays the bills and fills you with a sense of meaning. For
something to be a genuinely good activity, it not only has to have beneficial
effects but also has to be done with good intentions. So you have to do
things that help people (or at least not hurt them), and you also have to do
these things because you want people to enjoy what you create. Even
though the goal is to make a nice little profit along the way, it’s the
orientation that will determine whether the objective is fulfilling. The point
is that none of these things need to be mutually exclusive. But
unfortunately, many people sacrifice one thing (happiness) for another
(money), when all they need to do to have both is to stop being a Charles.
You can make great money with the right intentions doing what you love.
But you can also make great money with the wrong intentions doing what
you hate.
So here’s why generalism is important. Generalists are people who want
to get better at almost everything, because almost everything is of interest to
them or useful in some way. Specialists, on the other hand, can’t help but
match their identity to an outcome, because when people are striving to be
the best in the world, they’ve really put themselves in a tough situation.
They’ve built unhappiness into the system, whereas generalists are not
overly concerned with an outcome and enjoy engaging in, and getting better
at, some genuinely good activity. Of course, generalists are still going to
dominate the competition, but that’s more a happy by-product of being
unique and good at many things. Generalists, however, never tie happiness
to how many people they are doing better than, because generalists aren’t
trying to be better than anyone; they’re only trying to be better at things.
See the difference?
By its very nature, specialization is set up to produce unhappiness,
either because you’re striving to be the best and not succeeding at it, or
because even on the .0001 percent chance that you do become the best, it’s
next to impossible to stay there. Eventually you’re going to lose, and
somebody is going to take your place and say you were never the best to
begin with—they were. I don’t know about you, but I’ve been in a few
situations where both of these things have happened, and never did I feel
particularly keen about it. When I specialized in guitar, I was always
comparing myself to others and feeling awful and inadequate, and then assoon as I felt I was doing something special, somebody would swoop in and
be like, Nah, dude, you suck, here, let me show you how that should
actually be played. But as a generalist I don’t have that problem anymore;
I’ve gotten away from wanting to be better than other people, and now I just
focus on being good myself.Chapter Three
BECOMING AN EXPERT
GENERALIST: FIVE KEY
PRINCIPLES
S
o far we’ve talked a lot about why specialization is often a snare and
what to do about it, and hopefully you’re starting to see some of the
advantages of becoming a generalist, such as being successful without
hating every step along the way or having any special inheritance, genetic
or otherwise.
Often people pick up a self-help book looking for tactics or strategies
(Just tell me what to do so I can get on my way—I’ve got a meeting to
attend), but to me that is totally the wrong way to go about it. What people
need first is a foundational understanding of a general concept, before
getting into any of the finer details.
For example, when it comes to weight loss, one of the principles is
caloric control. Often people are concerned with specific diet plans, though,
and since they don’t understand that any diet can work so long as it reduces
calories, they wind up hopping from one diet plan to the next, never
knowing why all of them fail. But the reason plans fail (or work initially
and then stop working) is that the dieter hasn’t understood the theory of
thermodynamics or how metabolism works. Once you understand those
theories, you can then figure out the most appropriate diet plan by
determining which one is going to most effectively get your calories to
where they need to be while taking metabolic adaptations into account.Fasting—not eating for a while—is one good example; it’s a topic I’ve
written a lot about. Some people think it’s the greatest thing on earth, which
sometimes confuses me. Indeed, fasting works for a lot of people, but it’s
important to know that it works because it takes large swaths of calories out
of a person’s diet. Sometimes fasting doesn’t work, though, because it
makes people so hungry that they wind up binging on foods they otherwise
would have declined, and then they’ll come to me and say, “Hey, so I tried
your stupid fasting plan and it caused me to gain ten pounds, so what gives?
WTF?” Which is when I’ll tell them—as delicately as I can—that they
should have taken the time to read the principles section before they got
started with the plan; that way they would have known to modify the fasting
schedule so they wouldn’t get to such a point of overwhelming hunger.
This is true for generalism. Because as we continue throughout this
book, we’re going to present a framework that shows how you can go about
developing skills. Before we do so, however, you need to understand the
principles of what we’re talking about, the principles behind getting better
at getting better at things.
These principles are as follows:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Skill Stacking > Specialization
Short-Term Specialization
The Rule of 80 Percent
Integration > Isolation
Repetition and Resistance
Let me give you a brief explanation of each principle, and then we’ll see
how they would apply toward getting better at something probably all of us
are interested in: fitness.
Skill Stacking > Specialization
Simply put, it’s better to be better (than most people, at most things) than to
be the best at any one thing. Skills in combination are more powerful than
individual skills by themselves, even if they aren’t as fully developed. This
is the fundamental advantage of being a generalist. But it’s not enough toacquire skills. You must also learn to combine them. For reference, I’m
using the “greater than” (>) sign to mean “better than.”
Short-Term Specialization
Being a generalist doesn’t mean you try to improve at everything at once.
Good generalists are really just short-term specialists in the sense that they
focus on one or two things at a time, and once those things are developed
up to 80 percent (but never beyond—see the next principle), they then turn
their attention to something else.
The Rule of 80 Percent
The Rule of 80 Percent says that if 100 percent is best in the world, then
never go beyond 80 percent at anything, because that’s specialization
territory. Eighty percent, believe me, is still masterful, so you can safely
assume that if you’re 80 percent good at something and still not getting
ahead in life, then that something is not your problem. It’s time to acquire
another skill.
Integration > Isolation
This principle states that you should practice only the things you need to get
good at, as they pertain to the task at hand. This may seem obvious, but
often people focus too much attention on techniques or skills that make no
sense for what they want to achieve. For example, there’s no point in a
guitarist who wants to play AC/DC songs learning a B ♭ 13 chord since
AC/DC never uses B♭13 chords.
This principle also states that as far as possible, any technique should be
practiced in the context of whatever outcome you’re hoping to get. Again
thinking of the guitarist who wants to play AC/DC songs, that guitarist
should learn just the chords needed to play those songs and preferably in the
context of the song itself. Specific practice produces specific results, so
practice only the things you need and nothing more.
Repetition and ResistanceFinally, if you want to get better at something, you need to not only practice
that something but also find ways to make it harder on yourself. It’s not
enough to simply do something; you also need to make that something
difficult for yourself.
FITNESS AS A METAPHOR
I think one of the best ways to explain these five principles would be
through the example of fitness, and even though not many people think of
fitness as a skill, they most definitely should, because what is a skill if not
the ability to complete a task, and what is fitness if not exactly that? It
seems to me that being able to do a pull-up is hardly different in theory
from being able to play a guitar solo, since both activities require the use of
Repetition and Resistance. The only actual difference is the kind of skill a
person is performing; neither activity is any less of a skill.
Part of the reason a lot of people never reach their fitness goals is that
they don’t think of fitness as a skill; they think of fitness as a habit. And
while building a habit is important for building a skill, it’s not enough to
just get into the routine of doing something without also finding a way to
progress within that routine. Putting yourself in a routine will make you
only marginally better at that skill; it will make you better than the people
who don’t do that something at all, but it will hardly make you great at it.
For that, you need these other principles.
So how about I talk you through this from the standpoint of a gym
instructor, because wouldn’t that be fun? We’ll imagine I’m addressing a
bunch of mealymouthed middle schoolers who are timid about exercise—
essentially my former self. I want to do this because I feel like when I was
in school, I got the worst impression about fitness imaginable since I was
always forced to do it without understanding why, and then I’d get
embarrassed because of how terrible I was. I’m sure some of you can relate.
Now, let me grab my whistle and put my gym shorts on. Ready?
All right, children, gather ’round. Today is your first day of gym class,
so there are a few things we need to get across before we subject your tiny
bodies to the rigors that await. First, it’s important to understand that fitnessis no different than music or math in the sense that all we’re doing is
learning a skill. But instead of keeping time or adding integers, we’re
practicing physical things like pushups and pull-ups. And while some
people may be more inclined to be musicians or mathematicians, others
may be more inclined to do pull-ups. That doesn’t mean, however, that
people who aren’t inclined to do pull-ups can never be good at pull-ups. (By
“inclined,” I mean just naturally good at something.)
Fitness, for example, is considered a skill because you get better at what
you practice. This is known as “specific adaptations to imposed demands,”
and it applies to literally everything you can think of. You don’t get better at
softball without practicing hitting or pitching. You don’t get better at
making burritos without folding tortillas. You don’t get better at the guitar
without playing guitar, and you don’t get better at push-ups without doing
push-ups. Fitness is really a collection of skills, now, isn’t it? Or at least we
think it should be. Are people really “fit” if they can do a thousand sit-ups
but can’t run a mile or climb a rope or do a push-up? It doesn’t seem to me
like they’re fit at all; they’ve just got one ability. That seems like a
specialist, or somebody who’s good at one thing but bad at everything else.
This class isn’t about building specialists; it’s about building generalists.
Our goal is to create what’s called “general physical preparedness.”
Children, I want you to be capable of, and ready for, almost everything.
I want you to be able to climb a rope and run a mile and lift heavy things. I
don’t want you to worry about being the best at any one of these gym class
activities. We’ll leave that for the specialists. Our goal is to get as fit as we
can across a very broad array of activities. GPP > SPP is our motto: general
physical preparedness over specific physical preparedness.
Why? Well, a couple of reasons. First: the competitive advantage.
Surely you will not beat specialists at their specialty, but you will beat them
at most anything that isn’t. You won’t outlift a powerlifter, but you should
outrun them and have more flexibility and speed. You won’t outrun a
triathlete, but you should lift heavier weights and have more muscle tone
than they do. And so on and so forth. Your generalism will give you more
advantages, so if there were ever a fitness Olympics with all kinds of
different tasks to complete, you might not take first place in any event, but
you might take first place overall. That’s kind of what we’re going for.But also this: fitness and health are not the same thing, and this is
something you really need to understand. As we said, fitness is the ability to
complete a task, but health is something like the ideal interplay between the
organs and bodily systems. The problem with specializing is that you can
actually take fitness to the point where it destroys your health. You can try
so hard to be the best at some physical thing that you blow out your back in
the process or cause your kidneys to fail. These things do happen, and
detriments to health are all too common a price to pay for wanting to be the
best in the world at something involving fitness. Just think of most football
players or powerlifters or gymnasts. Nobody would deny that a person must
be very fit to achieve greatness in any of those sports, but I also doubt
anyone would deny that they take a heavy toll. The football player winds up
concussed, and the powerlifter winds up in need of new vertebrae, and the
gymnast winds up with seriously deformed elbows. This is the price of
specialization. There is no escaping it.
But the generalist doesn’t have to suffer any such ills since they don’t
care about being the best at anything. The generalist—and that’s you,
children—doesn’t have to put fitness and health at odds, and in fact does
exactly the opposite. Whatever we do to increase our fitness should at least
not cause harm to our health and should preferably improve it. This means
that if we are getting fit in one sense, we’d like to see an increase of health
in a similar sense. Fitness is a foundation of health, and health is a
foundation of fitness.
GENERAL PHYSICAL PREPAREDNESS:
ONE-PAGE EXERCISE PROGRAM
Here is a sample plan that you can use to get started on your general
fitness. (See the end of the plan for more information and a link to
find out more.)
GeneralWalk 20–60 minutes per day. Use the following morning-
recharge/mobility routine: 2 minutes of jumping rope; 5 minutes of
Turkish get-ups; 2 minutes of Hindu push-ups.
DAY 1:Push, Hinge—5 sets of 3 @ 5 RM.
DAY 2:Squat, Pull—3 sets of 8 @ 12 RM.
Carry: 3 sets × 1 minute.
DAY 3:Interval running. 10-second sprint;
30-second jog; 1-minute brisk
walk. Repeat for 15–20 minutes.
DAY 4:Push, Hinge—3 sets of 8 @ 12
RM.
DAY 5:Pull, Squat—5 sets of 3 @ 5 RM.
Carry: 3 sets × 1 minute.
DAY 6:Push, Pull, Hinge, Squat—3 sets x
5 reps @ 7 RM.
DAY 7:Walking and mobility only.
Exercise Options
Visit my website at www.chroniclesofstrength.com to find tutorials
for all these exercises.
PUSH:Military press, bench, dip, push-up.
PULL:Pull-up, chin-up, bent-over row.
HINGE:Deadlift, single deadlift, hip thrust, kettlebell swing.
SQUAT:Front squat, back squat, goblet squat, split squat.
CARRY:Farmer walk, overhead walk, rack walk.
Notes@ RM means “at rep max,” so 7 RM means to use a weight you
could lift for no more than 7 reps on that particular exercise.
Intensity is paramount—be sure you’re going heavy enough.
Recommended Additional Reading and Resources
Intervention (Dan John); Paleo Workouts for Dummies (Kellyann
Petrucci, Pat Flynn); “101 Kettlebell Workouts” (Pat Flynn), free at
101kettlebellworkouts.com. My YouTube channel for tutorials on
the exercises: www.youtube.com/user/supmuhhumbruh.
To be a generalist in fitness is to be fit at many things, not just one. So
we can say people are “fitness generalists” to the extent they can do many
tasks well even if they can’t do any one task best. Everyone got that? Please
put that down in your notes. This is the first principle, you see. GPP > SPP
(Skill Stacking > Specialization).
Listen up because this next part is important. Since I just made the case
for why we’re going to focus on being generalists and not specialists, now I
have to tell you how we’re going to go about it. And this part is going to
sound a little ironic at first, but I promise it’ll make sense once we get into a
couple of examples. The reason it’s going to sound ironic is this: a
generalist is really just a short-term specialist. I understand that I just spent
the past fifteen minutes arguing against specialization, but what I was really
arguing against was not the use of specialization but being a specialist, and
there is a great deal of difference between the two. The use of specialization
is just focusing on something to get better at it, whereas being a specialist is
a commitment to becoming the best at something because you think that’s
where you’re going to find success or happiness. A specialist is someone
who uses long-term specialization, then. But a generalist is someone who
uses Short-Term Specialization. Here, sit up straight, and let me explain.
The generalist—and this doesn’t matter whether it’s in fitness or
anything else—doesn’t get good at (almost) everything by trying to do
everything at once. That would be a fool’s assumption. Such an approach
would only dilute effectiveness and cause a person to go mostly nowhere.
Instead, generalists must learn to surge and maintain. They must learn topush in one area while not letting everything else fall completely to shreds.
This is your second principle: a good generalist is just a short-term
specialist. Mark it down.
For example, if you want to get better at lifting weights, then you should
spend a period doing precisely that, and we should make weightlifting the
initial focus of our program. That doesn’t mean we can’t still run or stretch
or practice handstands; it only means we’ve established a priority. It means
that if we are ever caught in a situation where we only have fifteen minutes
to work out, we should spend most of that fifteen minutes squatting or
deadlifting or whatever. Every skill is obtained by practicing that skill
specifically, so we use Short-Term Specialization to bring up whatever skill
set we need as efficiently as possible, and once we’ve achieved a
sufficiency at that skill, we can then toss it in maintenance mode and put
our attention on a new skill. So maybe we go from lifting weights four
times a week to lifting weights two times a week and focus more on
running or gymnastics or what have you. These are just examples to get the
principle across—don’t worry about the details yet. Simply know for now
that we must devote a lot of attention and energy to whatever we want to
get better at, but at the same time, we should allocate enough attention and
energy to prevent everything else from deteriorating.
The principle of Short-Term Specialization also relies on the fact that no
skill is quite as difficult to preserve as it is to learn in the first place. Here’s
what I mean. It takes a lot more effort to get your deadlift to double your
body weight than it does to keep it there. It also takes a lot more effort to
learn a handstand than it does to maintain a handstand. Some skills are
surely more slippery than others in the sense that they fall off sooner than
you’d like, but no skill takes quite so much effort to maintain as it does to
gain. Think, for example, of riding a bike: it takes a while to learn but
hardly any effort to remain fairly decent at it. This is why we put more
attention and energy into building a skill than into holding on to it—that’s
how this whole thing works. But at the same time, we can’t expect a skill to
maintain itself; we still need to allot some amount of practice time to it even
if that amount of time isn’t as much as it was before.
If we’re looking at our curriculum, then, maybe we’ll spend a unit on
strength and a unit on conditioning and a unit on flexibility and a unit on
something else, and while each of those units will have a clear“specialization,” we’ll still keep up with everything we’ve practiced so far.
We’ll still lift in the conditioning unit, and we’ll still stretch in the strength
unit, even if that isn’t where we spend most of our time. Our greatest focus
will be on whatever the theme of the unit is. Does that make sense? And
have you put it in your notes? Because this is a very important principle.
You cannot be a good generalist without knowing what Short-Term
Specialization is and how to rotate periods of emphasis on each particular
skill set.
Essentially, what I’m saying is that if you took a snapshot of a
generalist’s training program, you might assume that person is a specialist,
but then when you zoom out and look at how the plan switches emphasis
over time, you’ll start to see what we’re really after: becoming capable of,
and ready for, almost everything.
This brings us to our next principle, the Rule of 80 Percent, which states
that if 100 percent is “best in the world” at something, then we should never
go beyond 80 percent “good” at anything. This might sound even more
peculiar than the last principle, but again, it will make a lot of sense if you
can just sit still and let me explain it to you. I appreciate your patience, I
really do. You’re such good children. And handsome!
Imagine our goal is to become better than most people at most things
(which, as generalists, it is). Then when, I must ask, do you think we will
ever need to be more than 80 percent good at something? The answer is
never—you will never need to be more than 80 percent good at one skill
unless your goal is to become a specialist, which would obviously defeat
the entire purpose of this conversation. So that’s reason number one.
Reason number two is that 80 percent good at something is already so far
beyond masterful that it’s hard to imagine any situation where getting better
at that something will contribute significantly to any goal that isn’t lifelong
specialization. For example, say you want to be generally physically fit and
you can benchpress close to five hundred pounds, which is in at least the
eightieth percentile of powerlifting, but you’re fifty pounds overweight.
Adding more weight to your bench press is not going to help you achieve
the goal of becoming more generally fit. At this point, I think nutrition is
your problem. I think it’s time to learn another skill.
The Rule of 80 Percent is really set up as a sort of shockproof BS
detector in the sense that it’s supposed to help us figure out what ourproblem isn’t. Because the closer you get to that 80 percent mark, the more
you can be sure that particular skill isn’t your problem. Another example is
if you can run fifty miles but can’t lift your own body weight up to a pull-up
bar. At this point, it doesn’t seem like cardio is your problem—lack of
strength is your problem.
Finally, I want you to know that 80 percent is the cutoff, not the goal,
since most of us will never need to get anywhere near that proficient at
something to get what we need out of it. Most people don’t need to get to
80 percent of the world’s heaviest deadlift to achieve what they need out of
deadlifting; they probably need to get to only 20 to 40 percent. All the Rule
of 80 Percent states is that we should never go beyond 80 percent good at
something, because as soon as we do, we’re no longer generalists.
Did everybody get that? Great! Because now we can talk about our next
principle, which is Integration > Isolation. This is perhaps the most
complicated principle but also the one most worth understanding, because
so many people get so confused about skill development, when it really
doesn’t need to be complicated at all.
All Integration > Isolation says is that you should practice whatever
skills you want to improve in the context of whatever goal you want to
achieve. Take an exercise like the pull-up, for example. This is a skill that
can be used to achieve a variety of goals. You can use the pull-up to build
strength, muscle, or endurance. But how you practice that technique will
determine the effect. For example, if I want to use pull-ups to develop
strength, then I should keep my reps low and the weight high by adding a
belt with some plates attached. If I want to use pull-ups to build muscle,
then I should do a few more reps with a little less weight. Finally, if I want
to use pull-ups to increase endurance, I should do as many reps as I can.
Now, I get that some of you think this example is absurd because you can’t
imagine even doing one pull-up at this point. But let’s imagine pull-ups
aren’t some insanely difficult thing, which they shouldn’t be, and won’t be,
once I’m through with you.
The point of Integration > Isolation is that to the extent that it is
practical, we should practice every skill and technique within the context of
generating an outcome. If we’re on a strength program, then we should
practice only the exercises we need to build the most amount of strength,
and we should practice those exercises according to the sets and reps thatwill make us strong. There is no use in learning exercises at this point that
don’t directly attribute to our goal, even if those exercises seem interesting.
For example, in this case, there’s no reason we should be spending time
learning how to breaststroke. The breaststroke is a fine exercise and useful
for endurance (because swimming is useful for endurance), but we
shouldn’t spend most of our time during a strength phase in a swimming
pool, geriatric workouts excluded. This would be like learning to draw
cartoons when you want to create realistic oil paintings of landscapes.
Integration > Isolation forces us to start with the end in mind and devise
a plan based on what we want to achieve. Mostly it helps us focus
specifically on the skills we need to practice to produce a particular
outcome. For example, if we want to get better at running, then we should
put together a plan that teaches stride mechanics and features protocols to
increase aerobic capacity, and preferably we should be able to practice
stride mechanics within the context of those aerobic protocols. In other
words, we practice the technique of running within the running program
itself. What I’m talking about is being as efficient as possible and focusing
our attention and effort as specifically as possible on exactly the things we
need to improve and not wasting any time on extraneous or irrelevant
activity. What is extraneous or irrelevant activity? Simply anything that
isn’t directly related to the goal. Bench press is extraneous or irrelevant if
the goal is to become a better runner, but it’s not extraneous or irrelevant if
the goal is to build a bigger chest or upper body strength. This principle
requires context, and just about any skill or technique can be validated by it
so long as you’re clear on what you want to achieve and what’s needed to
achieve it.
A running program probably shouldn’t focus overmuch on bench-
pressing, though we should (according to our third principle) bench-press
every now and then just to maintain what we’ve already earned. And
probably a strength program shouldn’t focus overmuch on running, though
we should (again, according to our third principle) run every now and then
to maintain that particular skill. Over time, we switch back and forth to
further develop each of these areas independently.
This brings us to our final principle: Repetition and Resistance. We
can’t expect to get better at something without doing that something and
finding ways to make it harder as we go. In other words, if we want to getstronger, we need to do an exercise and then add weight. Keep in mind,
adding weight is increasing resistance. It isn’t enough to just do any old
exercise however we feel like doing it. We must do the exercise we want to
get better at, and we must find a way to challenge ourselves with it. Let’s
take the example of push-ups, since I think that’s something everybody
should be able to do, and if you can’t, then here’s your opportunity to learn.
The first thing you need to understand is that you’re never going to get
better at push-ups unless you actually practice them (repetition), and you’re
never going to get past a certain point with push-ups unless you find ways
to make them challenging (resistance). Maybe that means doing more push-
ups in a set (density) or more push-ups throughout the day (volume) or
adding weight to (or changing the angle of) your push-ups (intensity) or just
doing them more often (frequency). All these variables are ways of
increasing resistance, and all of them work, though some may work better
for certain exercises than others. But also remember that how we challenge
ourselves with push-ups should depend on the principle that we covered
before this one (Integration > Isolation). So, for example, if we want to use
push-ups to develop strength, we should focus more on adding intensity
(increasing weight or altering the leverage), whereas if we want to use
push-ups to develop endurance, we should focus more on adding density
(increasing the number we do per set). Again, some context is needed, but
for now we aren’t trying to get that specific; I just want you to understand
the principles and their universality.
Yes, universality. Because so far I’ve only spoken about how these
principles apply to skills found within fitness, but perhaps it would now be
appropriate to take off my gym shorts and provide a few analogies of how
they might apply to other disciplines. (Except I won’t actually take my
shorts off because you either go commando or you don’t, and look, I’ve
made my decision. At some point you’re going to have to make yours.)
Let’s imagine we want to get better at writing, and we’re looking at
these five principles. First, we need to determine what kind of writing we
want to get better at. Do we want to become better humor writers or fantasy
novelists or what? Let’s say we want to become better humor writers
(Short-Term Specialization); I think that’s a fine place to start and a useful
skill, especially if you ever want to start a blog or write a book, since it’s a
good thing to be able to make people laugh. Then we’ve got to think aboutthe skills we need to get a chuckle out of someone. The first, it seems,
would be the power of observation, since all humor is essentially just telling
people the truth in a more efficient way than what they’re used to. For
example, I saw a chuckle-worthy definition the other day that read,
“Charity, verb: to make an ingrate.” I thought that was pretty good because
it’s something to which everybody can relate. You probably remember a
time when you opened your house to people and fed them dinner and let
them shower, and did they ever say thanks? No, all they did was leave
dishes in the sink and hair in the drain. Then obviously you felt like asking
them to leave, but you thought about what Jesus said on the mountain about
people you can’t stand, though since you aren’t a Bible scholar, you can’t
remember what it was, only you’re pretty sure it had something to do with
being nice.
So it seems to me that being funny comes down to surprising people
with something they already think is the case. At least that’s part of it. So
maybe you start developing your humor by paying better attention to what’s
going on and taking notes of things that seem ironic. That’s Repetition and
Resistance. And say you’re in the fitness field like I am, so maybe you pay
particular attention to whatever ironies you see in the gym (Integration >
Isolation), which, God knows, offers no small amount of material. Now, I
don’t want to get too far into this just yet. I only want to point out how these
principles apply no matter what skill you want to get better at. And
obviously humor is an example of a skill that can attach to basically
anything, so it fits in perfectly with the idea of a skill stack.
Here’s how I’d like to wrap up this section: memorize these five
principles and start to think of ways they might apply to something you
want to get better at. Or use these five principles to assess why you didn’t
improve at something as quickly as you would have liked. That’s what’s
helpful about the way we’re doing things: you can apply the principles of
generalism to get better quickly, and you can employ them to figure out
where or why you’re stuck on something you’ve already started.
In the next couple of sections, I’ll begin to outline what I believe are a
series of essential skills, because if we’re going to acquire a stack of skills,
we need a foundation on which to construct it. And that foundation should
be composed of skills that are useful and awesome for everybody. So go use
the bathroom if you need to, but hurry back. The fun is just about to begin.Chapter Four
HOW TO PRACTICE BETTER AND
IMPROVE FASTER
N
ow that I’ve explained the principles of generalism, I’ll tell you how
I came to learn about each of them through a specific skill or teacher. I want
you to know before we begin, however, that these principles are universal
and not attached to any particular skill, even if I happened to learn them
through playing guitar, growing eggplants, or what have you. There were
also times when I already knew the principles, but they hadn’t yet gelled
completely in my consciousness. They were merely a blood pudding of
amalgamated ideas that needed more time to congeal. I suspect this might
also be the case for you—a lot of these principles are pretty much common
sense, and sometimes people just need to structure them up or flesh them
out or allow them to marinate. My hope with the sections that follow is to
do exactly that, by giving a fuller representation of each of these five
principles and some context about how they apply or at least how they
applied for me. Later, we’ll get specific on how and what to practice in
accordance with these principles for assembling a skill stack.
Please understand that these five principles are the orienting and
philosophic foundation of generalism, and without them, any tactics we’ll
examine later may still be limitedly useful but might also send you in the
wrong direction, chasing pointless things. Principles are what guide us, so
don’t skip ahead. Be patient and thorough in examining these following few
pages. The lessons are neither long nor lugubrious, but they are important.PRINCIPLE 1: SKILL STACKING >
SPECIALIZATION
I learned about skill stacking from my high school guitar instructor, who
made me very unhappy at first because all I wanted was to learn shredder-
style guitar solos. But every time I proposed doing so, he’d say we should
take the time to learn other kinds of music too. He’d say he could tell I was
very eager to play shredding solos, but that alone wasn’t going to make me
a better musician.
Essentially, he taught me that since I was already good at that type of
solo, getting better at that wasn’t going to take me where I wanted to go,
and he’d explain how he’s kept himself in business as a guitarist by filling
whatever roles people needed in either a studio or a band. That isn’t
something a specialist (particularly a shredder-style guitar soloist) is able to
do. And then to prove the point, he’d show how he could play rock music
and jazz and country, and how he could sing, and how he could riff on the
piano and the bass and the drums, all hootin’ and hollerin’ like, and so I
came to decide that maybe this guy was onto something. But that was
hardly the half of it, because then he’d show how adept he was at producing
and marketing, as well, since he had thirteen albums out, and not one of
them was a total flop by any conventional standards of self-publication.
Meaning they sold more than thirteen copies.
So you’d think at this point I’d have been receptive to what he had to
say, but don’t worry, I definitely wasn’t. I was still stuck on being a
specialist—the greatest shredderstyle guitar soloist in a time when nobody
listened to that technique. But he kept trying to get me to understand and
take his advice to heart. He’d explain that it was because he was not the
best at any one thing that he always had a paying gig and had always been
able to make money on his own and support his family. He also explained
how getting good at many different things gave him many different streams
of income, including playing in a band, playing in recording sessions,
selling his own music, and, of course, giving guitar lessons to friendly
people like me. This is how he was making half a million dollars or so a
year as a guitarist without being famous or the best in the world—withouteven having a college degree. When he told me that, I was like, Wow, this
guy makes more money than my dad, and I kid you not, he actually said, “I
bet that’s more than your dad makes.” It struck me: You know that’s kind of
weird you’d say that, but technically I think you are correct.
Now, here was a guy who made good money, and he was doing
something I admired: he was playing the guitar and he was awesome at it.
Sure, he wasn’t famous like Angus Young of AC/DC, but he was really
good, and he was beholden to no one. He made his own music and his own
schedule. He was doing what he loved and thriving while doing it.
The secret to all of it: skill stacking.
Not only did he play a number of diverse styles and instruments, but he
took the time to learn all the necessary business-related skills, such as
producing and marketing and sales. He was the first to admit he wasn’t the
best at any of it, but he didn’t need to be. Just as any true generalist knows
(right, friends?), you only have to be just good enough at the various
necessary skills and then stack them together in a unique and useful way.
My guitar instructor did exactly that, and that’s why people chose him when
they needed someone on their recordings, since most bands don’t need a
musician who’s the best at just one thing—they need somebody who can
play rock one day and jazz the next, and maybe even sell some
paraphernalia.
What I learned from my guitar instructor is that skill stacking applies at
the bottom level and at the top, within a specific skill and to the whole
lasagna of life itself. For instance, he could also get the word out about his
skills and what he could offer, and he could cut albums that didn’t sound
half bad—that were quite catchy, in fact. I never appreciated that until I
became older, but looking back, now I can see this was all very deliberate
and effective and good.
He was a stark contrast to a lot of my previous guitar teachers. Yes,
some were more skilled guitar soloists or had better dexterity, but they were
not as musically versatile. Few knew much about marketing or producing or
sales. So maybe that’s why some of them were still living in a studio above
the music shop, with their girlfriend subsidizing the rent. They didn’t have
the skills to stack, so they were hoping they could become a good enough
specialist to be signed by a record label.I think that last point is among the most significant differences between
generalists and specialists. Specialists try to be the best at something so they
can get enough attention for somebody to scoop them up and offer them a
contract of some kind—they end up being dependent on somebody else.
Generalists, however, acquire whatever skills they need so they can be
successful entirely on their own. That, my little rabbit, is the secret to sweet,
sweet freedom.
I learned this principle as a young guitarist, but I didn’t fully apply it
until I was a business owner—that’s when it finally became obvious. When
it comes to business, I’m not the best at any one facet of it—I’m not the
best at writing or sales, and I’m not the best at training employees. But I’m
good to great at all of it, which is why I’ve been able to make money doing
what I like—really, doing what I love. It’s only because I’ve been able to
stack skills that I’ve gotten ahead of those who are clearly more capable
than I am at a particular specialty. So what if someone can do more pull-ups
than I can, because I can still do a lot of pull-ups, but you want to know
something? I can also launch a successful ad campaign, which that person
probably has no idea about. And maybe someone can launch a better
advertising campaign than I can, but I’m guessing I’m in better physical
shape.
See how that works? As a generalist, you always win, so long as you
know what to compete in.
Here’s the short of it: skill stacking lays a foundation for success that
gives you a chance at a thriving, meaningful, productive, and independent
existence, something like a Huacaya alpaca—standing ever so strong and
free atop the Andes mountains. And fluffy, let us not forget. Now, how you
go about stacking those skills is something we’ll get into later. But first,
let’s spend some time on the next principle, which applies more specifically
to skill development—Short-Term Specialization.
PRINCIPLE 2: SHORT-TERM
SPECIALIZATIONI finally decided I needed to get a handle on things when my anxiety
became enormously high—I felt it was time to start meditating. I hired an
online coach, some Zen guy, and the first thing he asked was how often I
was practicing meditation. I told him not very often, just a little bit here and
there. He asked me how many minutes a day that was, and I said sometimes
five minutes and sometimes zero minutes because I’ve got a lot of other
things to do. He then asked how much time I put into things that really
mean a lot to me (like exercise and guitar), and I said typically I practice
those every day. At that point, though, I could see what he was trying to do,
so I got ahead of him and said, “You know, coach, I think what I need—you
know what I need, coach?—I need to start practicing meditation like I
practice the guitar. Now, what do you think of that, coach?” He said that
sounded infinitely wise and wondered how I ever came to such an
enlightened conclusion. He told me that meditation, like any skill, must be
honed with focus and intensity. He said that it would not do to meditate just
“whenever the convenience presents itself,” just as it would not do to
exercise or play the guitar in such a haphazard way and expect to get better
at it. That is no way to make progress. “What you need to make progress,”
he continued, “is consistency.” He asked how much I wanted to get rid of
my anxiety, and I said I wanted to get rid of it more than anything. He said
that sounded significant but asked, “Do you hate it more than anything—
even more, say, than those little tiny hairs that fall down the back of your
neck when you’re getting a haircut?” I thought about it and concluded
they’re about equal. That’s how he knew I was seriously afflicted.
He asked why I was prioritizing so many activities other than getting rid
of anxiety. If anxiety was my biggest concern, he wondered, why was I so
focused on things that had no relevance to that? I told him that I didn’t
know why, and he speculated that perhaps I was afraid of something. And
he was right. I was afraid of what I might be giving up by getting rid of my
anxiety. I admitted I was scared that if I started to specialize in something
like meditation, I would lose progress elsewhere and not be as good at those
other skills anymore. He understood; I told him this, in itself, gave me
anxiety.
He seemed almost irritated at that, and he advised me that all progress is
a matter of managing compromise and I shouldn’t hold such a childish view
of things. If I want to fix one problem, I have to be willing to make a littleless progress on another, at least for the time being. He noted that if I’m
working especially hard on getting rid of my anxiety, then I shouldn’t be
concerned with setting all-time personal records in weightlifting or
perfecting my songwriting; I should just focus on getting good at
meditating. I shouldn’t let other areas of my life fall apart, but I need to be
willing to let progress slide occasionally and become OK with the notion of
“opportunity cost”—sacrificing some gains in one area for focus on another.
I understood what he was saying but didn’t like it. He said it didn’t
matter whether I liked it—this is how we improve, and I didn’t have to
specialize in meditation forever. I only needed to dedicate a long enough
period of time to make progress and establish a routine, and then I could
back off a bit. He explained that meditation is just like exercise in the sense
that I must devote more effort and energy up front to overcome my inertia,
but once I’ve built the momentum, it becomes fairly easy to maintain. I
didn’t know it at the time, but this man was explaining the principle of
Short-Term Specialization to me.
The fear I had is the same fear I think all of us have. We make progress
in one area, but then we’re afraid to switch focus because we don’t want
that progress to taper off. We’re afraid that if we focus on adding muscle
after losing weight, we won’t be as lean as we were before, so we keep
ourselves in a cycle of dieting. Sure we stay lean, but that comes at a cost.
We never really grow or improve in anything else.
However, if we would have just been OK with shifting focus for a
while, we could have added strength and muscle, and so what if we gain a
little weight in the process? We could always focus on leaning out again
later, and when we do, we’ll look even better than before since we’ll have a
lot more definition in our muscles.
It’s that little sacrifice in the short term that allows for considerable
progress in the long term. That’s Short-Term Specialization.
So, yeah, while I was meditating, I made a lot of progress reducing my
anxiety but not as much at everything else. But I still maintained everything
else and I even improved upon some skills. Just because you switch
emphasis doesn’t mean you have to let other skills fade away. It’s not
actually all that hard to get good at meditating while doing other things, like
staying physically active, for example. There’s enough time to short-term
specialize in each. But it is hard to start a successful business while trainingfor a bikini competition and recording a guitar album, for instance. These
types of goals are better done one at a time, I would think.
The point is that you have to be OK with letting some areas develop
more slowly as you surge in the area you most want to improve. You also
have to be OK if progress in some areas slips off a bit as you’re doing this.
This all sounds fine in theory, but in practice it comes with a lot of
hang-ups, because once we get good at something, we can hardly stand to
see it recede, even if only an inch. You’re going to have to get over that,
like I did. At some point these sacrifices have to be made, so they might as
well be made intentionally.
And remember you’re not letting progress slide forever. When you
come back to something later, you’ll probably make more progress than
ever, since you’ve given yourself the time to improve in other areas that
might very well support the previous thing.
For example, say you got strong at deadlifting, but then you decide to
lose some weight, so you go on a diet. Well chances are, while you’re
leaning out, your deadlift isn’t going to be as strong as it was, even though
you should still train the deadlift. Just accept that your deadlift will fall off a
little because the sacrifice you’re making with that skill is more than offset
by the progress you’re making in body composition. Once you’ve reached
your desired level of slimness, you can focus on deadlifting again, and the
next thing you know, you’ll be stronger than ever at it—this time without
being thirty pounds overweight. That’s the power of Short-Term
Specialization.
Back to my meditation example. After my coach said I was being silly
about this, he told me to start meditating first thing in the morning and to
put my best effort into it. He said to also challenge myself with one anxiety-
producing activity a day and use mindfulness to see my way through it (see
Principle 4: Integration > Isolation).
I followed his advice, and because I was willing to specialize for a little
while, I began to see a fantastic improvement in my quality of life: I
became way less anxious and started to sleep better and was a lot nicer to
people because of that. Obviously, this carried over and improved my
performance elsewhere, since less stress meant more attention, more focus.
In a roundabout way, it was specializing in meditation that made me better
at a lot of other things, including working out, because of the carryoverbenefits, just like the carryover benefits you get from exercise. Not all skills
work this way, but a lot of them do. It’s nice when it happens.
Speaking of fitness, this may be an appropriate segue into the next
principle: the Rule of 80 Percent, which is perfectly illustrated by the gym.
PRINCIPLE 3: THE RULE OF 80
PERCENT
The Rule of 80 Percent was taught to me in the weight room, since my
original fitness coach was also my tae kwon do instructor, who knew very
well there was little point in trying to be the best in the world at exercising.
Everything we did had to make me better at what I was trying to be good at,
which was kicking and punching things, and to do this, he wanted me to
improve as many areas of my fitness as possible, without going too far in
any one direction. This would lead me to being well-rounded, which also
means I would be better at tae kwon do.
We spent a lot of time strength training. But we also ran and stretched
muscles. He was making me a generalist in fitness, even if I had never
thought of it that way. And the one thing I most expressly remember about
training with him was that good enough was good enough. He never pushed
me to have the world’s heaviest front squat; he wanted me to have only a
heavy enough front squat to get what I needed from the exercise (in this
case, it was a stronger anterior chain, which meant more powerful kicks)
and then leave it at that. If an exercise wasn’t making me better at
everything else, we stopped focusing so much on it and moved on.
Well, fast-forward a little more than a decade and here we are with the
Rule of 80 Percent, which, as mentioned, states a that a generalist should go
up to, but never beyond, 80 percent “good” at anything. This principle was
again reinforced by my business partner Som Sikdar.
Som holds a major in electrical engineering from the University of
Pennsylvania and yet makes his living owning martial arts studios. He’s a
proficient generalist and he’s also good with graphs and numbers. The
reason I mention that is because Som once said that the closer you get to 80percent good at something, the more the rate of return diminishes, until it’s
not worth putting any more effort in—unless you’re trying to be the best in
the world at that particular something. He calls this point the “asymptotic
trade-off,” so if you’ve ever seen a chart where the slope suddenly rounds
off and starts decreasing at an increasing rate, you have some idea of what
Som’s talking about. It’s a sort of flattening-out point, as far as progress
goes.
As I explained in the previous chapter, if you’re already 80 percent good
at something and not reaching your goals, that something isn’t your
problem. For example, imagine being 80 percent good at bench-pressing.
Well, I just looked up the world record drug-free bench press, which the
internet tells me is 713 pounds. So if 713 pounds is 100 percent, then 80
percent good at bench-pressing is 570 pounds (for men). That is way more
than any person needs to get the benefits from bench-pressing—believe
that. I repeat, there is no reason a generalist needs to be more than 80
percent good at anything; there is no reason a generalist needs to be more
than 80 percent good at anything; there is no reason a generalist needs to be
more than 80 percent good at anything.
Now, I know I’ve repeated “80 percent” a bunch of times. But I don’t
want you to think of this principle as something you need to measure with
exact percentage points. It’s more of a perspective than anything. The
bottom line is that you should just enter training for any skill with the idea
that good enough is good enough, and that the closer you get to 80 percent
at that skill, the less likely it is that the skill is contributing to your overall
goal.
For example, let’s say your goal is to increase general physical
preparedness. Well, then, don’t spend most of your time trying to take your
bench press from 320 pounds to 350 pounds and miss out on everything
else. Let your bench press stay at 320 pounds and go work on handstands or
sprints or whatever. This is not to say you can’t still make improvements to
your bench press, but once you’ve gotten what you need out of the exercise,
the focus should be shifted.
I’m saying that the Rule of 80 Percent is used to inform Short-Term
Specialization; in other words, once you’ve reached the point of “good
enough,” it’s time to switch it up.But how do you know when good enough is good enough? Well, that
depends on the goal and what you expect to get out of whatever you’re
working on. But the general idea is that you’ll need more of the
fundamentals and less of the things that aren’t.
For strength you’ll need more of the big lifts like squats and deadlifts
and fewer of the isolation exercises, and for business you’ll need to know
more about sales and less about web design. Isolation exercises can support
the big lifts but not replace them, just like a good-looking website can
support an effective sales process but is by no means a sufficient substitute.
This is where the Rule of 80 Percent meets another concept, one that is
far more famous but shouldn’t be confused with the principle we’re talking
about, though they can certainly go together: the 80/20 rule. And what the
80/20 rule says is that 80 percent of your results will come from 20 percent
of your efforts—most of the time, anyway. So in strength 80 percent of your
progress will come from 20 percent of your exercise selection, and in
business 80 percent of your profits will come from 20 percent of your sales
efforts, and so on and so forth.
The reason for knowing the 80/20 rule is not to get rid of the stuff that is
less productive but to allocate your time and effort toward the stuff that is,
to be more efficient. Say, for example, you know that deadlifting is one of
those “vital few” exercises that offers significant return on investment (little
hint: it is); well, that should tell you it’s more worthwhile to develop the
deadlift to a higher percent than another exercise that isn’t as useful such as,
for example, the hamstring curl. What I’m saying is “good enough” at the
deadlift will be closer to 80 percent than “good enough” at the hamstring
curl, because the deadlift is more useful for building strength than the
hamstring curl is.
Let’s move on. These numbers are getting to be a bit much, and we still
have two more principles to go. Next, we’re going to see how we can better
practice our chosen skills through integration.
PRINCIPLE 4: INTEGRATION >
ISOLATIONAs anybody who’s started a business knows, there are a million things you
don’t know about starting a business, which can give you a lot to worry
about. (And not because you didn’t just drop out of college to make all your
dreams come true by starting a blog about how you got started exercising
again—no human could ever be that imprudent . . .) Starting a business is
overwhelming, so it’s hard, like really, really hard, to decide what the right
efforts are.
My business coach was always direct about this and said that when it
came to business, there were a few things I needed to be great at and a lot of
things I needed to be at least OK at. He said the things I needed to get great
at were attracting attention and making sales, and after that I should perhaps
know a little something about management and taxes and whatnot. But he
made it clear that if the goal was to make money, there were a lot of things I
could focus on but only a few things that I should focus on. He said the
essential skills of any business owner come down to getting attention,
making sales, and retaining customers. He said any skill that doesn’t
contribute to any of those can be initially ignored.
This reminded me of when I was a younger tae kwon do student. Som
told me that while there are a thousand and one kicks, you need to know
only about five to ten to be a competitor—roundhouse, back kick, front
kick, and so on. There is no need, he said, to put too much effort into flying
side kicks or tornado rounds because you’ll hardly ever use them—at least
not in sparring, anyway. Well, it’s no different with music, because my
guitar instructor said pretty much the same thing: “Don’t worry so much
about studying all these obscure jazz chords or exotic Indian scales because
most of the stuff you’ll be asked to play will involve a lot of the same few
things in various forms—think of the Rolling Stones. Think of all the blues-
based rock bands. Get the basics down. Stick to the fundamentals.”
The principle of Integration > Isolation starts with the end in mind.
What is the goal, and how are you going to get there?
Not coincidentally, Integration > Isolation is a little bit like the 80/20
rule we just discussed because this principle is supposed to help us focus on
what’s important. We need to narrow things down so we know what to
practice and how. Integration > Isolation says practice only the things that
produce an effect necessary for the achievement of a goal and ignore
whatever doesn’t.But the principle also states that we should practice the skill as best as
possible within the context of the goal we want to achieve. Meaning that if
we want to play a particular song and we need to learn a G chord to do that,
then we should practice that G chord in the context of the song we want to
learn—that is, in relation to the other chords in the song, at the appropriate
tempo, and so on.
Only we may not be able to do that at first because the song may have a
fast tempo, and we may not be familiar with any of those other chords, so
we might have to pull the G chord out of context and practice it by itself a
while, which would indeed be isolation. Integration > Isolation doesn’t
mean a practice should never isolate an element; it only means a practice
should isolate only the specific techniques or skills you need that will later
become integrated toward the achievement of the goal. In fact, we often will
have to isolate because the skill or technique is new to us and putting it into
context right away just won’t be feasible. So we have to extract that skill or
technique and practice it on its own, and maybe we have to practice it very
slowly or in stages at first. We strum the G chord or maybe even just the
first two notes of a G chord, or we drill roundhouses on a heavy bag or
maybe before that we work on balancing on one leg. But as soon as we can
put that G chord into the context of the song or practice that roundhouse in
a sparring match, we should do that. So even if we aren’t able to integrate
right away, our goal is to integrate as soon as possible and to practice only
the skills that we will integrate. There are a potentially infinite number of
ways to isolate. In the above example, you could strum a G chord using
three strings on the guitar.
And just to be clear on our terms: to integrate means to perform
something within the context that it is intended to be in, and to isolate
means to extract something and practice it on its own so you can get it up to
speed. Isolation is a tool for learning a skill or technique by itself, but the
problem is that a person can get caught in a pattern of isolation and begin
learning skills or techniques for the sake of learning them, without actually
producing anything with them or using them for any sort of greater project.
An example would be practicing every conceivable tae kwon do kick
rather than learning only the few you need to win sparring matches, or
strumming every conceivable guitar chord instead of practicing only the
few you need to play your grandma’s favorite Elvis song.Generalism isn’t about learning every skill or technique in the world
“just because.” It’s about being better at just the right number of things and
then combining those things to form a competitive and creative advantage.
So that means figuring out the fundamental skills and then the fundamental
practices within them. Writing is a fundamental skill, but you don’t need to
learn every word in the dictionary to be good at it. In fact, you probably
already know all the words you need to be an effective wordsmith—you
just need to arrange them more clearly, which is a matter of integration, not
isolation.
Though maybe you don’t know enough words, so you do need to spend
some time with a dictionary or thesaurus. But even if that’s the case, you
shouldn’t spend any more time with that book than you need to get the job
done. Simply, as you begin writing and come to discover you can’t think of
the word you want, you should then open the reference to find it. In other
words, the practice of isolation is informed by your integration: When you
need a word, find it. But don’t spend all your time finding words you don’t
need.
Integration tells you what to isolate. Because if you’re integrating—that
is, practicing something within the context of an outcome—and realize
you’re coming up short on a particular skill or technique, then you’ll know
what skill or technique to isolate. Again using the example of an AC/DC
song, if you’re strumming along to “Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap” and
realize you’re struggling because you don’t know how to play a chord “on
the and of one,” that tells you it’s time to isolate playing chords “on the and
of one” until you’ve got the rhythm so perfected that you can play the chord
in context without even thinking about it. But you wouldn’t sit around
isolating every possible rhythmic configuration on the guitar. That would be
wasteful. Instead, you let the integration tell you what to practice in
isolation, and then you practice in isolation for as long as you need to, until
you can achieve integration. Make sense? Yes? No? Some grunt of
acknowledgment would be nice.
How we isolate and how we integrate will themselves be informed by
the next and last principle of generalism—Repetition and Resistance—but
let’s not get ahead of ourselves. The principles have flowed in this order
because I have decided that’s the order in which they should flow, which
makes perfect sense, of course. It’s a sort of topdown hierarchy, if you will,where we start by understanding what our goal is (Skill Stacking >
Specialization), how to achieve it generally (Short-Term Specialization),
how much to achieve of it (the Rule of 80 Percent), and then how to
proceed specifically (Integration > Isolation, and finally, Repetition and
Resistance).
PRINCIPLE 5: REPETITION AND
RESISTANCE
When I began working out, people couldn’t believe it because, of all my
friends, I was always the most out of shape. I was never good at sports, and
I was clumsy and hefty, so none of my so-called chums took me seriously
when I started going to the weight room. In fact, nobody did.
But as time went by, I began losing weight and building strength, and
after not too long, all the people who initially doubted were soon asking for
advice. And what I would say is this: you need to understand Repetition and
Resistance. That’s our starting point.
If you want to get stronger, if you want to build skill—because,
remember, this principle extends far beyond the weight room—you need to
practice what you want to get good at, and you need to find ways of making
it harder as you go. So when it comes to working out, you need to do the
exercises that are challenging, and you need to make them more
challenging because eventually you’ll adapt. In other words, you need to do
reps and add weight.
Part of the reason people don’t progress (in the gym or otherwise) is that
they’re doing reps but not adding weight. They’re in a routine, but they’re
not making their routine challenging—they’re not using progressive
resistance, in other words. They’re just keeping things the same. They keep
military-pressing the same weight or keep doing the same number of push-
ups or keep running the same number of miles. Well, it’s similar with any
other skill. Repetition will get you only so far. If you want to get stronger,
you need to add “weight” to whatever you’re doing.I think a lot of people understand that to improve at a skill, you have to
practice it, but I don’t think a lot of people understand that to really
improve, you have to find ways to practice that skill under increasingly
difficult demands. It’s not enough to merely write; you also have to try
writing at a higher level or in different styles. It’s not enough to merely
pluck notes on the guitar; you also have to pluck notes at different tempos
and time signatures. It’s not enough to merely practice what you’re already
good at; you have to practice the things that strain your capabilities—the
things that you’re not already good at it.
Here’s the litmus test: if you ever have a practice session in anything
and you’re not challenged by it, then you’re not using the principle of
Repetition and Resistance. You’re not really practicing, at least not in an
optimal way. So you can ignore all the terrific nonsense one is so
accustomed to hearing about only perfect practice being effective, because
whoever said that never did a workout with any significant weight.
When you’re struggling, your practice is never going to be perfect, but
it is going to improve. At the same time, your goal should always be to
improve the quality of your repetitions even as you are met with difficulty
—to keep your knees out as you squat more weight, to keep your notes
clear as you build speed—in other words, to not allow intensity to produce
slop. There will, of course, be some competition between consistency on
one hand and intensity on the other. It is obviously easier to maintain the
high quality of your reps if you always keep your reps the same, but that
would be defeating the purpose. At the same time, however, you should
never give yourself permission to slack on quality just because the
assignment is difficult.
If you want to make progress in the gym, you need to employ
progressive overload—that is, increasing resistance. In fact, if you want to
make progress at anything, you need to employ increasing resistance, as
well. But how you apply increasing resistance will depend on the skill and
how far along you are with it. We’ll talk specifics later, but for now there
are some general factors that can help you gauge what is appropriate and
what isn’t. To start, I would suggest memorizing the following motto:
“Challenged but successful.” Training to failure is often training to fail; that
is, purposely pushing past your known limits, rather than working
intelligently up to them, is a mistake. Thus, the secret to successfulpracticing—if there is one—is to push yourself up to, but not necessarily
beyond, your capabilities. If quality has become degraded in an exercise
because of the intensity at which you’re doing it, then you are no longer
getting better at the exercise—you’re serving slop. And the goal of an
exercise is not to serve slop. The goal is to get better at the exercise—
squats, chord sequences, writing sentences, whatever it is.
Occasionally you may exceed your limits (that’s called “strategic
overreach”), and that’s not always a bad thing, but it can be a bad thing if
that’s all you’re doing. Challenged but successful. Challenged but
successful. Challenged but successful.
But let’s not forget about repetition either, which resistance is destined
to rely on. You can’t add weight to something you’re not doing—or
something you’re not already familiar with—and that’s the point of
repetition: you need to practice specifically whatever it is you want to get
better at. Do reps at the thing you want to improve; do reps at the thing you
want to improve; do reps at the thing you want to improve. Don’t expect to
get better at pull-ups by running. (Aside from indirect carryover, that is. For
example, running may help a person lose weight, which in turn, would
make pull-ups easier. But running itself does not develop the strength for
pull-ups.) That may sound ludicrous—who would ever think to do
something so silly as that? But we make this mistake all the time. We avoid
doing the things we’re not good at and continue to practice our strengths,
hoping that one day our areas of weakness will somehow take care of
themselves. But this simply confuses solving a problem with ignoring it.
The rule of repetition takes that option away. If you want to get good at
something, you have to practice it.
All right, let’s wrap this chapter up. I think we’ve laid the necessary
groundwork to launch into the specifics of this fantabulous little enterprise
—generalism. The principles are there, and they’re what we’re going to be
basing our practice upon. What comes next is more difficult, not in a
theoretical sense but in a practical sense, because the onus will soon be put
entirely on you. I hope I’ve been exceptionally clear about this: just reading
this book won’t actually make you better at things. Did anybody think that
coming in? Oh God, I certainly hope not. Because if so, boy, are you going
to be disappointed when you see just how much I’m about to ask you to do.
The good news? The work will be efficient. We’ll adhere to theseprinciples, so our efforts will be swift and scientific. No time will be wasted
and no energy will be dispersed simply because we feel like experimenting
with things. There are no experiments here. Just a process. And it is to that
process that we now turn.Chapter Five
WHERE TO BEGIN: METASKILLS
I
n my house, up in the attic, there’s a picture of me from around third
grade. I don’t remember having this picture taken—probably because I
never wanted it taken—and I don’t recall how it got into my house, since
it’s a school portrait that probably my mom should have, hanging above the
staircase next to my sister Bridget’s. But somehow it found its way onto my
desk, and I haven’t been able to put it away because, for some reason when
I look at it, I can’t help but feel a certain way about it. Why is that? Is it
because I knew this kid would have a somewhat shaky start in life? Not
exactly. This isn’t about feeling bad for myself. This is about wanting to
elevate myself so if I ever could go back in time, I’d be able to assure this
little version of me that everything would turn out more or less OK.
Now, a lot of people—some much more successful than me—hang
portraits of their heroes on the wall, so it might seem a little perverse, some
might even say a little narcissistic, for me to find motivation in staring at a
picture of myself. But I look at it only because it serves a purpose. This
photo of me in an ugly brown-and-white sweater vest, smiling a stretched
and dimpled smile, full of naïveté and annoyance, serves as a self-reminder
to work hard and become the sort of person whom this young boy would be
proud of if he knew exactly how his life was going to turn out.
It reminds me that I don’t want to be just successful. That I don’t want
to be just good at things. That I want to do what’s important, what matters.
I’m over being remembered or famous. If it happens, great. Mostly I want
to make a difference. And to do that, I need to show up every day and put in
the work that would inspire my younger self and cause me to look forwardto—at the very least not be worried about—the person I was about to
become. More than anything, I’d want to be able to assure my younger self
that my life would have meaning. That I would do something. And that this
something would matter.
In the previous pages, I’ve made the argument that meaning is found in
freedom but not the kind of freedom most Americans would think of.
Freedom comes in knowing and making and doing good things, and all of
that is more Aristotelian than it is uniquely American. Americans are—
how’s the best way to put this?—umm . . . headstrong? Rebelliously
independent? We don’t like to be told what to do. I get that, believe me—I
don’t like to be told what to do either, especially by some guy in a book, let
alone one I’ve never met. But these types of freedom (freedom of
indifference and freedom for excellence) are not mutually exclusive—
they’re just different types—and one, as we’ve argued, is merely requisite
for another. I said you need skills to express yourself—to do and know and
make good things—and to the extent you have more skills, rather than
fewer skills, well, all the better, wouldn’t you say? When this is stated
simply, I think most would agree. Even we rebellious Americans.
We also start to go against the conventional perspective of achievement
when we talk about generalism—or the idea that it is actually better to
eschew hard-core, lifelong specialization and to just get OK, maybe even
good to great, at a lot of things and then find ways to combine them.
It’s good to have skills and know things. So far, I’ve presented a series
of principles for developing skills, though all of that has been very general.
Now I’d like to get specific. And here’s how I think we should go about it.
When I first began talking about generalism on my blog, a lot of people
asked how I would approach public education, since so much of what I was
saying seemed contrary to what we are taught in school, particularly in
college. We’re instructed to specialize. We’re told that if we want to get
ahead, we need to narrow our interests, not widen them. The whole thing is
very screwing. It’s why people get degrees in subjects like economics. And
it’s why people then get even more specialized in their degrees upon
graduating, like studying international trade theory, for instance. I think this
is a misstep for a lot of people. Not because the world doesn’t need
specialists, but because it probably doesn’t need another international tradetheorist telling us how to run the world economy. We’ve had just about
enough of those, thank you very much.
To answer this question of how I would approach education, I think it
might be instructive, and perhaps interesting, to take a lesson from Mister
Rogers and enter the Neighborhood of Make-Believe, where I’m the
principal—no, take that back . . . Imperial Viceroy—of all the schools in the
world. The World School System, let’s call it. And since we’re in the
Neighborhood of Make-Believe, we can simply ignore any small, technical
hiccup that might arise in an actual top-down, centrally planned regime.
Because even if thought experiments like this one are not practical on a
societal level, that doesn’t mean they can’t impart knowledge on a personal
one. By explaining how I would educate all God’s children—that is, how I
would teach generalism, generally—my hope is that you’ll see how this
would apply to you individually—that is, how you could become a
generalist, specifically.
The idea behind my World School System would be to bring kids up
through a hierarchy of skills, whereupon the foundation would be skills that
are essential and helpful to anyone—these we shall call metaskills—and
then the skills would become more particular and specific and (probably)
exciting as we go.
This is how we should create a skill stack: First, we build the bottom
and focus on all the skills that apply to everyone, skills like focus and logic
and faith. (Those last two may sound contradictory, but you’ll see why
they’re not.) From there, we plop on our personal interests. Maybe we want
to be musicians or cage fighters or whatever. Wonderful, let’s spend time
developing those interest skills. Finally, as it is in most situations, there are
“filler” or need-based skills required—skills needed to bridge the gap
between being good at something and getting paid to do it.
So these are the types of skills:
Metaskills
Fundamental skills that are helpful to everyone. For example, persuasion.
Interest SkillsSkills you are interested in and love doing. For example, playing the
ukulele.
Need-Based Skills
Skills needed to make a living around your interest. For example, marketing
and promotion.
Looking at the above skill stack, if a person were good at the ukulele,
but also knew a thing about persuasion and how to advertise, they would
have (almost) everything they need to garner a paycheck by playing their
adorable little instrument, even if they’re not the best in the world at it. That
would be the objective of my World School System: to teach all kids the
skills every human should possess, develop the skills each individual is
particularly interested in, and layer on any other skills needed for each
person to make a living by doing what they love. That’s a skill stack.
YOUR FIRST DAY AT SCHOOL
A Letter from the Imperial Viceroy
Welcome to your first day as part of the World School System. I’m glad you
made it—as if you had any other choice. You’re here now, and that’s all that
matters. And we’re all together. Isn’t that nice? I just think that is so nice.
Since we have so many formative years ahead of us, I thought we
should take a few moments to get to know one another and to understand
the reason why we’re here. Because the job, of course, of the World School
System is to guide our youth—that’s you!—toward competency,
productivity, fulfillment, and being a useful, not-too-annoying citizen. The
goal is to get the stars to align, so to speak, to ensure that all our students
find that just-right mix of success and happiness and peace.
So here I am, looking at you. And I can see on all your smiling faces the
look of carbonated optimism. That is optimism, right? Or do you need to
use the bathroom? OK, you go to the bathroom, but everybody else stay
where you are and keep looking optimistic. Because I think optimism is justwonderful. I think we can all have trust in some providential hand at play,
even if we must not think everything’s going to be done for us. I think we
must view the world in a certain, very particular way, and I think a quid pro
quo perspective might help. In other words, the universe gives to those who
go out and get. There are no metaphysical handouts, so to speak. Only hand
ups.
You may not always get what you want, but you’ll almost certainly get
what you deserve, and a few things you don’t. So yes, providence is there,
but you have to respond to it. You have to take the time to develop yourself
and accept challenges and build character.
There’s a scene in the 1967 version of the movie The Jungle Book—
which is far too old for most of you to remember—where a boy, Mowgli,
has escaped into the wild and joined with an army of elephants, lined up in
single file. The elephant in charge, Colonel Hathi, is pacing up and down,
lecturing his troops. At one point, he examines the trunk of a rookie
elephant and associates it with a dusty firearm.
“Soldier,” he says, “remember in battle that trunk can save your life.”
Then, after a short ramble about earning his commission in the maharaja’s
Fifth Pachyderm Brigade, he exclaims, “It was then I received the Victoria
Cross for bravery above and beyond the call of duty. Ha ha! Those were the
days. Discipline! Discipline was the thing! Builds character, and all that sort
of thing, you know.”
In that short scene, Colonel Hathi has given us one of the great secrets
to life. It’s about discipline. Because discipline builds character “and all that
sort of thing, you know.” Discipline, in other words, equals freedom—the
freedom to express yourself, the freedom to do good things and make good
things, and to know what good things are.
Discipline is one of the first metaskills we’re going to learn, because
discipline, one could say, is the most fundamental, the most essential, of all
the skills a human can have. Since without discipline what do you have?
What you have are improperly ordered values and priorities. What you have
is a lack of the ethic to deny what’s gratifying in lieu of what’s important.
And that, my little elephant, is a problem. You are a slave to your animal
instincts.
We’ll work on that shortly, and don’t worry, this isn’t boot camp. But
we do have standards. After discipline comes focus, which is in some waysan extension of discipline, though we can think of focus as discipline
applied, or discipline concentrated. Focus will prevent us from getting
distracted. We’ll examine that in a few moments.
Next is logic, because if we can learn logic, we can learn how to learn.
It’s the skill that takes care of so many other skills above the fundamental
level. Without logic we’re lost; we’ll fall for pretty much anything. But with
logic we’re found. We can figure things out and not say or do generally
unintelligent things. That’s all logic is: thinking done right and done well.
Next, and this is the one I’m sure everybody will be interested in, is
persuasion. Essentially, how do you get along with people? How do you get
people to like you? Sometimes people think of persuasion as a series of
psychological tricks or clichés or manipulation strategies. But that’s not
really persuasion. Persuasion is about taking a stand and having a voice and
making what you say attractive to people—or at least some people.
Finally, we have faith. Yup. And this is the big one. Faith is what
undergirds and reinforces all efforts and creations and orients those efforts
and creations toward the continuous and purposeful development of self.
It’s what stops us from chasing the wrong things in life, like becoming a
career prostitute or congressperson, pardon the redundancy. Faith is what
keeps us going. It gives us a sense of surety when it seems the world has
gone completely insane—which, trust me, it has. So maybe also trust me
when I say you’re going to need faith and you’re going to have to work at
it. It’s why we think of faith as a skill.
Now, I get that none of these fundamental skills may seem particularly
appealing at first, especially to children. Who really wants to study logic?
But I can promise you this: once you see how useful these metaskills are for
getting pretty much whatever you want out of life, they will become not
only interesting but immensely so. Think of it this way. Learn logic, and
never lose an argument again, even if nobody else knows it, and even if it’s
only because you’ll learn exactly what arguments not to make. Wouldn’t
that be a nice position to be in?
Lastly, we’ll work on these skills through the principles of generalism—
by applying Short-Term Specialization, the Rule of 80 Percent, Integration
> Isolation, Repetition and Resistance, and, what’s that other one again?—
ah yes, Skill Stacking > Specialization. How could I forget? Because that
one is really what this school is about. We’re not overmuch concerned withany of you becoming the best at anything, because, well, let’s be honest
here—that isn’t what this is about. We merely want you to be exceedingly
competent across a wide swath of human abilities so you can combine the
skills fundamental to whatever just so happens to interest you, and be not
only productive but fulfilled.
Let’s begin.
DISCIPLINE
You’re not going to have a lot of discipline at first—this is just a fact.
You’re going to have a tough time keeping your butt in the chair or getting
your butt to the gym. Because your butt has a mind of its own—and this we
call Butt Mind—which is notorious for offering temptations and reasons to
procrastinate. This is where we need to step in and assertively protest, “No,
you listen to me, Butt Mind. I am in control. You listen to me, now.” And I
think this is pretty much what discipline is about: getting your butt to sit
when it would rather run, and getting your butt to run when it would rather
sit.
Butt Mind is not just a metaphor; it’s something we all say to ourselves,
and probably a lot more often than we think. It goes, “Yes, but . . .”
What is discipline? Discipline is this: putting yourself in a position to
follow orders, and hopefully, eventually, your own. We need discipline
because we can’t acquire skill without routine, and we can’t find meaning
without something to work on, something we feel is significant, like writing
a novel, becoming religious, or baking a cake. Without discipline we’re just
wishy-washy. Life will toss us whichever way it wants.
Discipline gives us meaning, then, because it gives us something to do;
through discipline, we work at our craft and can make things. We also learn
things. And through discipline, we develop a routine that makes sense of
our day—we wake up, steep the coffee grounds, and start on something big
and fantastic. We sit our butts in the seat or use them to do kettlebell
swings. Maybe toward the evening, there’s time for a dessert, but let’s just
see how the day goes before we make any decisions about that. Discipline
sets the agenda, and that’s what makes us productive and creative.Whoever has found discipline has found freedom. Discipline, in fact,
equals freedom, and there’s actually now a guy who writes books on this
idea, and he’s a former Navy SEAL and people love him. He also happens
to be fairly intimidating, so when he says discipline equals freedom, you’re
likely to believe him. Now, I’m not particularly intimidating, so I wouldn’t
expect I could just say something and have you take my word for it. But
hopefully by this point I’ve made a good argument, because I’ve said about
a million times that the person with freedom is not the person who chooses
to do whatever they want but the person who chooses to not do whatever
they want. Freedom is found in restriction, restriction that leads to the
practice of something useful. If you want freedom, you need boundaries
that force you to improve. You need to impose rules upon yourself, and you
need to adhere to those rules as if they were enforced by someone in
uniform.
So, like I said, you’re not gonna have a lot of discipline at first. Because
nobody does. You’re probably gonna start out a pretty indolent sack, like
me. You’ll slink by. You’ll do the minimum. You’ll cheat on your exams by
peering over a person’s shoulder, and if they’re bratty about it, they’ll wrap
their arms around their test so you can’t see what they’re writing. But one
day something will hit you where it hurts, and you’ll realize you’ve been
wasting your life with this attitude of mere survival and disinterest in
getting better at things. We can say this is your awakening. You’ll feel
degenerate and awful, which, believe it or not, is a good thing. I mean it’s
certainly better to feel degenerate and awful now, while you can still do
something about it, than to feel degenerate and awful on your deathbed.
Let’s take a few minutes, right now, to all feel degenerate and awful, so
we don’t wind up like that. Everyone feel it? The terribleness? OK, good.
Because sometimes you need to meditate not just on what you do want but
on all the things you don’t want, to get yourself inspired.
The problem with calling discipline a skill is that it leads us into
somewhat of a paradox. Because what do you need to develop skill, if not
discipline? And if discipline is a skill and you don’t have discipline, then
how in the name of Jonah and the whale do you even get started on such a
thing? I’ll tell you. You go back to that deteriorated and abysmal sense of
self—the Lack, as I call it. You look yourself dead in the eye (most peoplewill need a mirror for this) and say, “Enough is enough, you sack of
mildewed shit. It’s time to get it together.”
Discipline is empowered by passion. Sometimes that passion starts as a
negative, and as you improve, it goes into a chrysanthemum or whatever
they call it and turns itself into this big, huge, beautiful, and bountiful thing.
It becomes gorgeous and worth pursuing. It becomes something you want to
chase, rather than something that chases you. But at first, yes, most of us
find discipline by trying to avoid some ugly and significant, god-awful, no-
good, terrible pain in our lives, so the more we meditate on that pain, the
less we stop trying to ignore it or avoid it, and the more passion we have for
our pursuit.
Maybe you’re like I was. Maybe you’re sick of being slower, less
informed, and less skilled than almost everyone. Maybe you want to just be
happy for a while, to feel that your life has meaning and that you actually
did something terrific and awesome, like whoever invented disinfectant
wipes. That guy should be super proud. Because honestly, that’s enough;
you can’t really ask for anything more. But you need to focus on that sense
of inadequacy—like visualize it, you know. Yes, it’ll suck, and it’ll sound
like the reverse of all self-help advice that says you should envision your
future with mansions atop waterfalls, but it’ll get you going when you don’t
feel like you have the discipline to start. It’ll motivate you more than
mansions atop waterfalls; you’re just going to have to trust me on that. Pain
is the only way out. The Buddha taught us that when he said nirvana is
found through way of samsara. He made a compelling point.
I remember working with a guy—he wasn’t exactly a life coach but he
kind of was—who had me do an exercise in which I brought to mind five
life instances when I was embarrassed or ashamed because of my lack of
initiative; five times when I really wish I had done something, but I didn’t
or couldn’t act. He then had me review those scenes repeatedly to build
disgust, to the point that I simply had to do something about it. And so I
did. I remembered the time I failed to ask a girl to the fifth-grade dance
(and then somebody else did), the time I got cut from the basketball team,
and so on and so forth. I kept rewinding and reviewing these scenes, over
and over. And the very next day, almost entirely out of the blue, I signed up
for tae kwon do. Because to me that seemed ideal. Why not start with thisone very simple and humble skill and then use it to kick the ass of
everybody who ever made fun of me? How perfect.
As mentioned earlier, I started working out because I hated the way I
looked and I hated that everybody was better than me at everything I
wanted to be better than them at. I hated being picked on, pushed around,
and picked last for pretty much everything. I didn’t feel fondly about any of
these things at the time, but I remember them fondly now. They led me into
that chrysanthemum, remember? They changed me from a fat and
disheveled teenage derelict with a fairly significant dandruff problem to
somebody with something to show for myself—in this case, a yellow belt.
As I started to lose weight, I started to gain confidence. What happens
when you gain confidence? Your discipline improves. When you gain
confidence, you gain discipline—a different discipline, a discipline that
comes from being excited about what you can do, not what you’re trying to
run away from. The whole thing eventually flips over on itself, like a
pancake. And now one side is beautifully firm and brown because you’ve
been cooking it. It’s no longer clumpy and amorphous.
All of us must start with a belief that we can, in fact, do something
about ourselves and that it’s never too late to start. No matter how ragged
you feel, no matter how run-down, you’re never past the point of rescue,
unless you’re, say, ninety-three, maybe?—then we might want to consider
other options. But so long as you’re not ninety-three—and maybe even if
you’re ninety-two—it’s never too late to turn the operation around and
become the person you’ve wanted to be.
I’ll give you an example. I have a much older friend who was really
overweight his entire life—more than fifty years. And in just these last two
years he’s lost one hundred pounds and his attitude and outlook and
everything is just so cool to see. He has confidence now. He’s out doing
things. He’s pursuing goals, learning skills, starting a health business, even.
And when I asked why he was able to succeed this time, after starting and
stopping so many times before, he said it was because he finally gave
himself permission to succeed. He said every time he tried to lose weight
before, he always doubted that he could do it. He never really believed.
Now, I didn’t get a chance to conduct a full and proper psychoanalysis on
him, but if I had to guess, I’d think it was that he finally realized he was
worth investing in. He also had something of a religious experience. So thathelped. Give yourself permission to believe. It should also be mentioned, of
course, that he trained with me. I do seem to have a knack for getting
people to lose weight; I’m like the fat-person whisperer. (I can say that
because I used to be more than just hefty myself, but don’t you say that. It
might come off a little insensitive.)
Finally, how do you get started? The question answers itself. Get
started.
And get started on something that interests you, because discipline isn’t
a skill you develop in isolation. It’s a skill you develop through integration,
through the practice of something specific, like karate. You don’t sit down
and “do” discipline, because what would that look like? It would look like
you were just sitting there, and unless that sitting involves meditating,
you’re not actually practicing discipline. You’d have to be doing something
to be practicing discipline, right? So you sit down and write or strum the
guitar or get up and exercise, and that is practicing discipline. The secret is
to start with whatever rouses the emotions, whatever infuses you with
passion.
There are other things we can do as well, like, for example, following an
exercise program. Here’s an idea: make the first act you do every day an act
of discipline. This can be a workout or a meditation or a cold shower. In
fact, I think it should be a workout and a meditation. Because why not
both? So let’s put that into the schedule. Let’s say that at the start of the day
we do a little exercise and then spend a little time focused on our breathing.
We’ll start with the sweaty stuff and then become super silent. It won’t take
long. Say, a ten- to fifteen-minute workout, followed by a ten- to fifteen-
minute meditation. We’re talking thirty minutes max.
I remember when I used to spend the night at my grandparents’ house,
I’d come downstairs in the morning to find my grandfather working out. He
did a simple routine, but he did it every morning with no exceptions or
complaints. He’d start with some push-ups and then he’d use hand weights
and finish on the ground and stretch like a frog. It wasn’t the most laborious
workout I’ve ever seen, but then again it didn’t have to be. He was very
active otherwise, so this was just the start of his day, a way to get himself
going.
Small acts of discipline undertaken every day do magical and fantastic
things to our unconscious mind. Having the discipline to do the work kick-starts the creative process. A writer friend of mine said good ideas are
rewarded to those with a disciplined mind; it’s not something you just
happen into. He said if you want to invoke the muse, you have to show that
you are worthy of handling what she gives you, and the only way to do that
is to show up every day and to be on time. He said it’s like waiting outside a
Zen monastery. You’re going to be tested. And likely you’ll think you’ll
never get in. But eventually, if you keep showing up, those doors will open,
even if only to slide you a piece of bread. The good ideas will come. I
promise—at least, he promises.
This means that you need to get better at showing up for whatever you
want to get better at. That’s discipline, and we practice it by starting
something and finishing what we start. Because next to starting, finishing is
the hardest thing, maybe even harder than starting itself. The only thing that
isn’t hard to finish is sex. So in one sense I’m just super at finishing, but in
another I’m still working on it like anybody. Because you get started and
you get so far along and then you quit, because—well, you know—life is
hard. That’s why we need discipline. It’s about the only thing that can get us
through.
Exercise can help. We can torture ourselves physically to acquire grit—
that always works. Certainly it does in the military. We can do exercises
that are just plain excruciating and see if we can go ten seconds longer (or
ten pounds heavier) than we think, every time, or every other time, or what
have you. Front squats, hollow holds, pretty much any of these will do the
trick. Whatever hurts. Whatever you hate doing, go with that.
As we move into the other sections—that is, the other metaskills—you
will find particular ways of practicing discipline. Note that your initial
discipline must come by pursuing what’s important. All the other metaskills
can follow. And they will follow as you become interested in them—you
should become interested in them because they’re fun skills to have and,
like, super useful.
Here is one quick and very important part of developing discipline:
track and monitor everything. Write down what you eat, what workouts
you’re doing, all your income and expenses. If you’re playing guitar, record
your practice sessions; if you’re practicing a martial art, then get yourself
on videotape. What gets measured gets managed, as they say. And you
know what? “They” are right. Tracking builds not only awareness butaccountability. It also illuminates progress. It gives you something to
celebrate.
So one last word about discipline before we move on. Let’s talk about
moderation—you know, that whole idea of just dipping your toe in, starting
slow, and so on. Well, I’ve got to go ahead and say I think the concept is
mostly, if not entirely, worthless. The disciplined person is one of extremes,
often even a person obsessed. When it’s time to go, we go all the way:
Short-Term Specialization, remember. Now, none of that means we’ve gotta
be perfect or can never enjoy a little something sweet after we’ve eaten our
protein and vegetables. It just means that when we commit, we don’t
commit 70 percent. We commit 100 percent, even if we can only give 70
percent sometimes. It’s the intention that counts. This is different from the
Rule of 80 Percent we learned earlier, just to clarify.
This is why, when I’m talking fitness or business and people ask how
long it will take to reach their goal, I give them an estimate of about double
the time I honestly expect. This is sort of my assessment device. Because if
you care about something—if you’ve found that boiling-hot cauldron of
passion—then spending double the amount of time on developing that
something should be no big deal, right?
If you ask me how long it will take to become happy and successful and
totally fulfilled, and I reply, “Until you’re ninety-three,” would you still be
interested? Would you still engage in everything we’re about to do?
The good news? I’m convinced anybody can achieve freedom and
happiness—that anybody can become a successful generalist and a
sufficiently disciplined person—with about an hour or two of practice a day.
My only request is that you should be willing to give eight. (I’ve provided
some brief guidelines for developing each skill discussed in this chapter, to
give you a kick start.)
DAILY DISCIPLINE CHECKLIST
Establish a regular bedtime. Get at least seven to eight hours of
sleep. (Preferably, wake up before 5 AM and go to bed before 10
PM.)Exercise at least thirty minutes a day.
Meditate/pray at least ten minutes a day.
Eat protein at every meal.
Take a cold shower or a shower with a cold finish (i.e., use cold
water for the last two minutes).
Walk ten thousand steps a day.
Each day, do without something you “need” (hint: phone, TV, etc.).
Make your bed.
Do the most difficult/important thing of the day first.
Keep a gratitude journal.
Recommended Additional Reading
Discipline Equals Freedom: Field Manual (Jocko Willink).
FOCUS
If there’s anything I’ve noticed about life, it’s that most of us probably think
too much and that most of the thinking we do isn’t superabundantly helpful.
In fact, it would seem that most of our thoughts are jealous, clingy, eerily
narcissistic, or otherwise focused on things that aren’t that important, like
what we would say if we ever got the chance to meet Richard Nixon,
whether we missed the boat on getting orthodontia, or whatever.
Thinking is a skill—and one we’ll soon get into—but not thinking is
also a skill, and that’s called “focus.” Others might refer to this as
meditation, but meditation is more of a technique used to develop the skill.
Focus can be used to make ourselves smart and to stop from going
insane. It’s a powerful skill and one that is left curiously undeveloped in
most people. With focus, we can concentrate on what matters and not giveinto our concupiscible appetites as much. We can say no to sin. Father Arul
would be proud. (Father Arul is a priest friend of mind. Short guy, mostly
bald, Indian. Maybe you know him?) Because with focus we can sit our
butts in the seat and not get up for anything. Focus is the skill that lets us do
the work once we’ve got the discipline to show.
Here’s the biggest differences between winners and losers in life: The
winners know how to keep their butts situated when it’s time to write or get
their butts in the gym when it’s time to train. The losers procrastinate. They
get distracted. They stop before the job is done. And that’s it. Now, part of
that is discipline; the other part is focus.
Because, here’s the thing (and I don’t know how else to put this): there
are enemies out there trying to do everything they can to stop us from
succeeding, demonic forces (I’m convinced) that delight in our undoing and
that we absolutely must battle against if we want to survive. Sound serious?
Well, it’s true. Author Steven Pressfield calls this universal negative force
“resistance.” And maybe I’m a bit old-school, but I just think of this bastard
as the Devil. Now, we can see that most public school systems have gotten
away from offering instruction on demonology, and personally I find that
just a little irresponsible. Because I very much believe the Devil is out
there, buzzing around with his big, leathery wings, or, occasionally, walking
on his buttocks like Red Guy from I Am Weasel, doing everything he can to
either scam, torment, or destroy us. And he’ll use whatever he can to do it,
too, though mostly he’ll work through secondary means, using such sly
instruments as complacency, self-doubt, and, as we know, the DMV. These
are just a few among his beloved pets. Also, the dishwasher repair guy. But
the most amazing trick the Devil has ever pulled is getting us to believe that
he doesn’t exist. That one, you can bring to the bank.
I really think so much of success is engaging in some level of spiritual
warfare. Butt Mind—the universe—Hades—resistance—Satan—whatever
this ongoing, negative opposition is and however you want to envision it—
is a real thing and is constantly attempting to thwart our efforts to make
something of ourselves. It throws every distraction and assignment on our
plate at once. It’s the reason there’s never a good time to start a diet plan,
write a book, or pick up a musical instrument, and it’s the reason there
never will be.Our job is to do whatever we can to piss the Devil off and let him know
that we’re simply not going to stand for this abuse. That no matter the
amount of smelly garbage he tries to pile in front of us, we’re going to
remain focused. We’re going to stay on the job, and we’re going to finish
what we start.
It’s not only the goings-on of life that get us distracted. It’s our thinking,
as well. Most of us have next to no control over the thoughts that flit
through our head. We’re possessed by them. Probably we feel we could
benefit from an exorcism, at times. And perhaps some of us could (a little
exorcism now and then never hurt), but the good news is that most of us
just need to learn to focus through the techniques of meditation and/or
prayer.
Because it usually goes something like this: You decide you want to do
something—let’s take writing for example. Say you’re excited—really
excited—because you just read a book that motivated your socks off and
now you’re going to practice the skill and you’re going to write a novel.
You know, I just think that’s swell. You haul your bony, little butt up to the
attic, sit down, and turn on your computer. You open a Word document,
crack your knuckles, and realize you forgot your cup of coffee. Darn. So
you schlep downstairs into the kitchen and brew something nice for
yourself, not once noticing how the Devil has already scored a point against
you. Now you’re back in the attic, ready to write. And then, a social media
notification. Oh joy, somebody commented on the thread you started in the
dog lovers group your sister added you to—how nice. So you take a peek to
see what they said, imagining it to be pleasant and interesting, and not
intending to start a conversation because you’ve got work to do. You click
on the person’s profile only to discover that their entire timeline is just one,
long, quivering, insane rant against everything you stand for politically and
religiously, and, well, that just about does it. You blast them with everything
you’ve got, barraging them from completely out of left field, and then slam
your computer shut. All right, now that that’s done, time for business.
There’s only one problem: you can’t get that reptilian idiot out of your head.
The excitement you had, the jollity over the project, has all turned to rage,
and you can’t stop thinking about all the things you wish you had said to
that person and their dumb little dog: you could have, for example,
illuminated them with the minorly helpful fact that the only reason theyexist is to serve as one hilarious and pathetic example of what not to look
like, and so it’s no wonder they own a corgi. You’re just so enraged; this
isn’t how your morning was supposed to go; this isn’t how you wanted to
write. And then, the doorbell. Well, look who decided to show—if it isn’t
our old friend, the dishwasher repair guy. And on and on it goes, your day
bombarded and beleaguered by all these distractions and disappointments
and doubt. Oh, you think this is coincidence, do you? OK. Sure.
That’s where focus comes in. It’s pretty much the only weapon we have.
To be able to stay on target. To sit and stay seated or run and keep running.
And this, believe me, is a skill. It’s not something any of us have. It’s
something we develop. Here’s how.
First, we sit. Cross-legged, tall kneeling, on a rocking chair—look, it
doesn’t matter. Just don’t lie in savasana like at the end of some heathenish
yoga ritual. Father Arul would be very upset. Plus, why run the risk of
becoming possessed by a throng of demons? It’s not like we don’t already
have enough to worry about. Second, we do something to center ourselves.
Here we could focus on breathing or reciting a mantra or prayer. For people
who are particularly prone to overthinking (yes, hello), I recommend
speaking aloud. It gives you something a little more solid to hold on to. The
whole mindful breathing thing is a bit much starting out. It’s too easy to get
distracted. But if it works for you, great. Or you could start with some sort
of guided meditation—that can be helpful.
FOCUS AND MEDITATION
Upon Waking
Engage in ten minutes of mindfulness mediation and/or prayer.
During the Day
Do “trigger” meditations:• Doorway mantras/prayers: Every time you walk through a doorway,
recite a mantra or say a prayer, returning to the present moment.
• Two-minute car meditation: Every time you’re about to leave the car
(or at least twice per day), take two minutes to practice mindfulness
meditation.
Before Bed
Engage in a mindfulness/prayer-based tea ritual an hour or so before
bed.
Recommended Additional Reading
How to Pray: Reflections and Essays (C. S. Lewis).
It’s pretty simple: We sit for at least five to ten minutes first thing in the
morning and let whatever thoughts happen to come, come. We don’t try to
push them away, but we don’t try to hold on to them either. Instead, we
simply note them. We build awareness and welcome them lovingly but also
don’t pay too much attention to them. Oh, hello anxiety—come right in.
Cup of tea, perhaps? It’s this warm, empathetic invitation that gives us
headspace. We’re after clarity and independence of mind—we’re after a
state where we’re no longer so entangled with our emotions that they
dictate our every behavior, and where we can dispassionately observe them,
almost as if we’re standing on the sidewalk, watching the cars go by.
Because most of the time it feels like we’re standing right in the middle of
the road, doesn’t it? Dodging and swerving and throwing our hands up,
yelling stop! Focus is simply about standing off to the side, where it’s safe
and not alarming. It’s not about trying to halt the traffic of your thinking,
which only leads to congestion problems. It’s about alleviating that
congestion and letting it cool off—which it will. You just need to get out of
its way. You need to stop getting so involved with the circulation of
thoughts. You need to stop playing traffic cop.Start your day with this. And do it again before lunch and then after
dinner. Remember the principles of generalism. Repetition and Resistance.
Start with a period of meditation and/or prayer that is challenging but leaves
you successful. Don’t strive for too much too soon—you’ll just get angry
and overwhelmed. Increase resistance by meditating or praying for longer
periods or in more chaotic environments, like work. The latter is when we
get into integration.
I remember a talk from a holy man who, upon being asked how often he
meditates, said he meditates all the time—that he was even meditating right
at that moment. The person interviewing him was astonished by this and his
eyes widened. He looked aghast. Now, this holy man could have been
making a bunch of stuff up, having once decided that so far as con jobs go,
spiritual guru might work out better in some respects than colonics, but say
he wasn’t. Say he was the real deal. Well, then I think the point the holy
man was making is that meditation isn’t something you’re supposed to do
on the side of a mountain. Meditation is something you’re supposed to
practice very nearly all the time.
Harnessing the power of focus is how we snap our attention onto
whatever deserves it and pull our attention away from anything that doesn’t.
There’s no reason your work—playing the piano, practicing with a potato
gun, shooting pool—shouldn’t be a point of meditation. You should also be
focusing on whatever skill you’re working on. But at first we develop the
skill by extracting the principles and practicing them in a seated or kneeling
position—at home, in church, while waiting in the parking lot as your
spouse finishes the weekly shopping—and as soon as we’re able, we apply
this focus to every single activity we can. This is how we break free of the
prison of our own minds; this is how we overcome anxiety and self-
sabotage and avoid turning into someone we really don’t want to be. It all
starts in our mind. Here’s a little suggested schedule to help you hone your
focus.
LOGIC
It was the philosopher Norman L. Geisler who told us why logic matters:Simply put, you can’t avoid studying logic, so you might as well
know what you’re doing. It is the basis for all other studies. It is
the basis for all math and science. Even music, from Bach to the
Beach Boys, is based on logic. Without it, there could be no
rational discussion of anything; writing would be impossible. How
can you put a sentence together without a logical order?
OK, sold. Now, where do we start? Well, we start by examining a few
simple rules of logical thinking, and learning what makes for a good
argument and how to avoid a few of the more common fallacies. For
example, learning the differences between induction and deduction, and
why you shouldn’t answer an argument by attacking a person’s character.
The basics, then.
LOGIC WORKSHEET
Questions to Ask Before Engaging in Argument
On this subject, what are my biases?
On this subject, am I willing to accept an outcome I dislike?
How could I argue against my position?
Have I taken the time to best understand my opponent’s position?
Thou Shalt Not Commit These Ten Logical Fallacies
1. RED HERRING: Intentionally distracting away from the
argument.
2. NON SEQUITUR: Arriving at a conclusion not supported by the
premises.
3. GENETIC FALLACY: Attempting to invalidate a position by
explaining how it came to originate. (Example: You think
democracy is great only because you grew up in America.)
4. BANDWAGON FALLACY: Assuming that because many
people believe something, it must therefore be true.5. COMPOSITION FALLACY: Assuming that something is true
of the whole because it is true of some—or all—of the parts.
(Example: If a team has all the best players, it will always win.)
6. AD HOMINEM: An attack on the person. Attempting to
undermine the character of a person rather than addressing their
argument.
7. FALSE DILEMMA: Claiming a situation to be either/or when
there is at least one additional option.
8. CIRCULAR REASONING / BEGGING THE QUESTION:
Already assuming what you are attempting to prove. In other
words, offering no evidence distinct from the conclusion.
(Sandusky is in Ohio. Therefore, Sandusky is in Ohio.)
9. APPEAL TO AUTHORITY: Assuming that just because
someone is in a position of authority, they are therefore correct.
10. STRAW MAN: Setting up an artificially weak version of an
opposing point, therefore making it easy to refute.
How to Practice Making Arguments
Join a Facebook debate group. Engage daily.
Record at least one logical fallacy in conversation per day.
Engage in frequent, consensual, low-stakes arguments with friends or
family.
Write a weekly well-reasoned opinion piece on social media.
Recommended Additional Reading
Come, Let Us Reason: An Introduction to Logical Thinking
(Norman L. Geisler and Ronald M. Brooks).
Logic is ordering your thoughts; it’s thinking done well and done right.
It’s what stops us from buying stupid things and voting for stupid people
and putting our fingers in places that could shock us. Logic, put frankly, is
life’s foolproof bullshit detector. And since this is your life, you’ve got to beable to think if you’re going to survive. You’ve got to be able to figure your
way through things. You’ve got to know what makes for a good argument
and what sound reasoning is.
Logic used to be a skill taught to almost everyone. Now almost no one
studies it. The effects of this, I think, are obvious and gross. People are
duped by slick-sounding folks with an appealing accent—on infomercials,
at political rallies, in the classroom. This is not good. This is really not
good.
We all like to think that thinking’s important, but very few of us ever
learn to do it well. We never learn what logic is or why it matters or how to
use it or how to tell when somebody else is using it, or not. It’s a skill with
carryover. To think clearly is to write clearly—or at least to have the
potential to. (It is also to have the potential to persuade, though we will
have more to say on that later.) This is why we say logic is a metaskill—
ordered thinking is how you make sense of the world and how you make
sense to other people.
You learn to think so you don’t get taken advantage of, but also so you
can express yourself, solve problems, and communicate. There’s a lot of
benefit to thinking about thinking. So let’s think about it. Specifically, let’s
think about how to get better at it.
Well, one way—and this is going to sound simple, but it works—is by
practicing puzzles. There are so many apps and games these days that set
you up with logical exercises: starting your day solving a few of these
puzzles will do a lot to build your critical capacity. Most people spend no
time with exercises like these, with questions like “If Bob and Jon and Matt
are all brothers, and the following statements are all true, who’s the oldest?”
Another one of the best ways to become a better thinker is to engage in
debate—to actually practice making arguments and defending a position on
something. So that’s why in our little World School System everybody is on
the debate team and everybody argues and is judged on how they do, and
winners will be celebrated and losers sentenced to some sort of yet-to-be-
determined, very likely excruciating, punishment, probably. Nobody gets
out of this. Because this will force students to intellectually grind a question
to pulp, and that’s something we should all get in the habit of doing.
There will be assigned reading, as well. The book in this class will be
Come, Let Us Reason: An Introduction to Logical Thinking by Norman L.Geisler and Ronald M. Brooks.
From there, each student will engage in a weekly debate with another
student or as part of a panel. Sometimes students will get to pick their topic
and other times they won’t, since it’s a good exercise to argue for a position
you don’t necessarily believe in—in fact, people should be doing that as
often as they can. A good debate involves knowing not only your position
but the opposite, as well. Plus, having to argue for a position you don’t
agree with will either strengthen your defense or cause you to adopt a
different point of view, but either way, you’re getting closer to getting
things right, and that’s what we want.
Like for any other skill, we use Integration > Isolation. Yes, it’s good to
study the rules of logic and each of the many individual fallacies—
something we don’t really have time to cover in detail now. You learn to be
logical mostly by making and defending arguments and trying to get better
at it. Pick a topic you’re interested in—it can be spicy or it can be dull (you
don’t have to make every argument about religion or politics). Some
arguments can be boring but made well, and that’s fine. It’s all practice.
Often it’s better to start with lower-key topics because emotions will be less
likely to erupt if, for example, you’re making an argument that oatmeal can
lower a person’s blood sugar instead of an argument that the minimum
wage has long-term effects on the American economy. Though you might
be surprised.
The next step is to increase resistance. Raise the stakes. Seek out more
rigorous topics and opponents. Talk about the minimum wage. Or religion.
Force yourself to establish a series of premises and defend them. Doing this
can be exhausting, but it makes you better. Sometimes you’ll lose. That’s
fine so long as you always take something away from it—either an
opportunity to strengthen your argument or change your position, because,
well, because you were wrong.
Here’s the thing: the person who practices logic understands that almost
all truth is discovered through the gradual removal of error. You figure out
what’s right by being corrected and adjusting your position on things.
Nobody is born with the answer to everything—not even Father Arul. We
have to figure out most of this as we go along, and be flexible and willing to
change. Logic, let me tell you, is just as useful for calling yourself out as it
is for calling out others. We all get emotional. We all form attachments tothings. But we mustn’t let what we want to be true determine our beliefs
about what actually is true.
If logic does anything, it gets you to think before you open your mouth,
and what a valuable skill that is. It gets you to assess your arguments before
you present them. And what a valuable skill that is.
For instance, right away, a sense of logic should stop a person from ever
falling for poor dietary advice, even if they don’t have a degree in
nutritional science. Of course, a degree in nutritional science can help, but
we all can’t have a degree in everything we’re interested in, and there are a
lot of things in life we’re going to need to figure out without having the
time to be formally educated in them. This is why we think about thinking:
so we can think about things and do a good job thinking about them, or at
least realize when we don’t have enough information to go on. Logic can
lead you to the right conclusion or, often, to the conclusion that you don’t
know enough to form a conclusion just yet. And that’s a wonderful and
prudent thing—not getting ahead of yourself.
Don’t worry about never being able to speak up for lack of certainty.
That’s not what logic is about. An argument is merely presenting reasons
for assuming that a position is true and making those reasons as convincing
as possible, even if they aren’t absolute. Say you want to argue for Austrian
economics, or the existence of God, or Megadeth over Metallica. You don’t
have to establish a geometric proof for any of these. You only need to offer
reasons that make your position more plausibly true than not, and some will
accept those reasons and others will attempt to refute them, but hopefully
everybody will learn something and get along.
I just want to emphasize the use of the word argument before we wrap
this discussion up. When most of us think about “arguing,” we picture how
badly our extended families behave around the holidays, shouting at each
other over their various religious and political and economic beliefs, never
once presenting anything in the realm of lucidity. That’s not what I mean
when I use that word; I mean something that is well presented and well
debated. Something, well, logical. Not something people do when they’re
drunk, not something emotional.
I’ve lost a lot of arguments, and I think I’m getting better at it. The
better I’ve gotten at losing arguments, the more I’ve tended to win them.
The point of arguing shouldn’t be to win, however. That may be the point ofbeing on a debate team, but that’s not the point of arguing, which should be
to figure out a position, to discover truth. The best way to win an argument
is to not be wrong, and the best way to be right is to know when you’re not
right. Logic can help you do that.
PERSUASION
So far, we’ve talked about discipline and focus (or patience) and logic (or
reason). Now we need to talk about persuasion. Because it’s hard to get
what you want in life without being able to convince people to give it to
you. That sounded odd. Let’s put it this way. It’s better to get along with
people than not. It’s better to have people like you than not. And if
persuasion is anything, it’s being liked by people, even if it’s only some of
them. So here’s how to get people to like you and why this doesn’t involve
being liked by everybody.
All worthwhile attention starts by telling the truth. If you want to be
persuasive, you need to have confidence in what you say, since people can
always tell when others aren’t sure of themselves. Persuasion isn’t about
getting everybody to like you. Persuasion is about getting enough people to
like you. Because here’s the problem people fall into: they think being
persuasive means to pander. But pandering isn’t being persuasive.
Pandering is having no backbone, no real, true center of belief. It’s not
having enough conviction to say what is true—it’s saying only what you
think people will like, whether you believe in it or not. Nobody wants to be
friends with somebody like that, or, if they do, it’s only because they want
to get something out of them, like free coffee at work.
People are attracted to those who have something to say and who
apparently believe in that something. And if you have something to say,
people are going to either agree with you or disagree with you. A good
example—love him or hate him—is Donald Trump. Very few people “like”
Donald Trump: they want to either marry him or send him to the gulag. I’m
not saying you have to be like Donald Trump to be persuasive, but I’m
saying there’s something you can learn from Donald Trump, who is
persuasive. (I’d like to note something about one of Donald Trump’spersuasion techniques. Some people say he’s a liar, yet I just said being
persuasive starts with telling the truth. What gives? Well, Donald Trump
has learned to make statements that are often “directionally true” but
specifically or in other ways exaggerated. This is a more nuanced technique
—and not something we have time to get into now—but it is not necessary
to use this technique to be persuasive, and I do not particularly agree with
its use on an ethical level, though virtually every effective politician
engages in it. Anyway, it’s worth noticing. For more, see the book Pre-
Suasion: A Revolutionary Way to Influence and Persuade by Robert
Cialdini.)
The first thing is to become very OK with the fact that not everybody is
going to like you and not everybody is going to agree with what you have to
say. Because as soon as you have something to say, there’s always someone
who will disagree with it—even if you state the earth is round, there will be
someone who disagrees with it, unfortunately—and someone who will be
offended by it. You simply can’t go through life worried about who you’re
going to upset with your beliefs. The very act of having beliefs is bound to
upset somebody. The fact that you own things is upsetting to someone, and
the fact I just said that is upsetting to someone else. Instead of worrying, go
through life getting clear on your beliefs and the reasons you adhere to
them, and then speak. Now, don’t be an ignoramus, however. Don’t voice
an opinion without backup. This is why we use logic and reason. Because
you’re going to need to know how to defend yourself after you’ve offended
someone, even if you never intended to.
Back when I got into fitness, a lot of my original audience was drawn to
me because I was bold about what I believed. A lot of people were
specializing. I was saying maybe try generalization, for a change. This got
me into no small number of arguments. But I always presented my reasons
lucidly (I think) without taking personal digs. People appreciated that. They
liked that I was clearheaded and that I was confident in what I had to say,
even in the midst of debate. And let’s be fair: I was also very fit, which
illustrated my beliefs. But so were many of the people I was arguing
against. Ultimately, my appeal came from standing for something—
something people themselves seemed interested in or at least curious about.
I was speaking up for the generalists and all the people who weren’t the best
at anything but still wanted to improve. That’s a lot of people.That’s one little secret of mine. When you speak about something, when
you voice your beliefs, if those beliefs are held by people in addition to
yourself, all the better. So much of persuasion is finding people who already
agree with you and getting them to follow along because you’ve found
some new, cool way of doing that thing they already agree with. I’m not
sure how many specialists’ minds I’ve changed. There may have been a
few. But mostly I’ve built my audience by attracting the attention of people
who were already generalists or wanted to be. Think of political talk shows.
They’re not necessarily persuasive to the other side—who on the right was
ever brought to the left by watching The View, and who on the left was ever
brought to the right by listening to Rush Limbaugh?—but they’re attractive
to people who already assume that position. It’s only because those talk
shows are so assertive and bold that people tune in and are “persuaded” by
them. Either people pay attention and they agree, or people pay attention
and they can’t stand a single word of what they’re hearing. This is called
the Howard Stern effect—you either love him or hate him—but almost
nobody is indifferent about him.
TWO-STEP NETWORKING AND
PERSUASION PLAN
Step 1
Reach out and introduce yourself to at least one new person every
day. (Form connections.)
Step 2
Reach out and ask how you can help someone already in your
network. Better yet, just do something to help them. (Build
reciprocity.)
IdeasShare something with your connections online, comment
meaningfully on their work, or send them something you think
they’d enjoy reading about. Even better, introduce them to someone
they might benefit from.
Recommended Additional Reading
How to Talk to Anyone: 92 Little Tricks for Big Success in
Relationships (Leil Lowndes).
At this point I’d like to add a measure of subtlety to this approach.
Although I’ve used examples like Donald Trump and Howard Stern, I don’t
want you to think being polemic is the same as being persuasive. These are
merely illustrations to bring out a particular element of persuasion, which is
polarization. You can be persuasive without being polemic, without causing
people to want to twist your bratty little nose off. But I’m not sure how
persuasive you can be without being polarizing—and that’s what I’m trying
to get at. To be polarizing is to make people choose one way or another. It’s
about marking your territory and saying, “Here’s what I believe and I want
to be as clear as I can about it.” You don’t need to be rude or offensive to be
polarizing, but you do need to be up-front about where you stand. People
don’t need to hate you, but some will strongly disagree with you or see your
way, your style, your product or service, as simply not for them. And that’s
fine. Because the more people you push away, the more you attract from the
other side.
The problem is that people are afraid of pushing away. They’re afraid of
not being liked by someone, and the tradeoff is that they wind up being
ignored by everyone. There’s a saying in marketing that if you’re not
upsetting at least one person with every advertisement you write, then
you’re not really marketing. I think this is true for everything. If you’re not
upsetting at least one person every day by taking a stand on something,
voicing your opinion, or being clear about who you are, then you’re not
really living. Think of the apostles. Those guys really knew how to piss
people off, since many were put to death because they just wouldn’t shut upabout that Jesus guy. And now look. People remember them, even though
they weren’t all that well liked at the time. Talk about polarizing. They
weren’t polemic or rude. They just said everybody else was wrong about,
well, pretty much everything. And that was enough.
You can tell people they’re wrong, and I think you should, but only if
you’ve reasoned out your point of view. Once you’ve got your life figured
out—your religion, your politics, your great, good service to the world—
talk about it. You’ll pull some people in and push others away, but I
promise you this: you’ll certainly be persuasive. Boldness is a lost attribute
in today’s society. People are so afraid to speak up about things. Even just a
mild act of courage goes a long way toward getting attention. That’s what
persuasion is—it’s having the courage to speak candidly about something
people already think is true. Good writing is the same way, and that’s why
good writing is persuasive.
People want to be happy. That’s the first thing to understand. Any action
people take will be aimed at happiness—there are no exceptions to this. But
different people believe different things will make them happy, which is
why we can have valuable exchanges in which both parties emerge better
than before. Thus, if you want to be persuasive, your job is to find the
people who think the thing you offer is what brings happiness, whether
that’s a diet plan, a skateboard, or a political ideology. Persuasion, I repeat,
is not about flipping a person’s opinion. It’s about confirming it.
I hope you weren’t looking for any psychological tricks or clichés you
could use to close the deal on a used-car sale. Because that isn’t what
persuasion is about. Persuasion is finding points of common interest and
connecting over them. It’s having the audacity to speak up. That’s why
persuasion, marketing, sales—whatever you want to call it—is inherently
magnetic. The more it pulls some people in, the more strongly it repels
others.
You may ask: How do you even practice this? Well, you practice it by
(again) getting into arguments and writing advertisements and sharing your
beliefs with people. Also, by networking. By reaching out. By being
friendly and offering help.
I’d like us to turn our attention to those last few points. Most people
suck at networking. They suck at reaching out and making friends. This is
absolutely a skill, and it is one you need to practice.Let’s talk for just another minute about persuasion through argument.
Remember, an argument isn’t about exploding your emotions; it’s about
giving someone reasons to believe in a particular point of view. The
purpose of the argument might be not to convince the person you’re arguing
against but to impress whoever’s in the audience. Let’s face it, almost every
argument these days is a public event, because almost every argument is
happening online. So if you’re debating on a forum with some person who’s
adamantly against everything you do and represent, I doubt you’re going to
make much progress with them. You never know who’s watching the
engagement, though, even if they’re not engaging themselves.
Again, when I was just getting started with my business, I would incite
arguments on internet fitness forums. When I say “arguments,” I don’t
mean I went into every thread and told everybody how wrong I thought
they were. Don’t be that person—that person is annoying and rude. Rather,
I would try to be helpful by being clear. I would say what I think a person
should do to reach a particular goal, and I would explain why. Obviously—
because it was the internet, after all—people would sometimes disagree
with me. Then I would have to argue with them because you don’t just let
somebody disagree with you—again, this is the internet. You’re allowed to
defend yourself, and you should, especially if you have good reasons for
what you believe. But it should be done respectfully. This is where one of
your fundamental skills (logic) can form the foundation of another
fundamental skill (persuasion).
Remember my definition of argument, which is no more than giving
people reasons to believe in a certain point of view. And when I say you
should start arguments, I mean you should try to be helpful by giving your
perspective on something—on social media, in an advertisement,
throughout the pages of a book. Because that, my little parakeet, is the
secret to persuasion: meeting people where they are and trying not to
change their beliefs but rather to enhance their beliefs. I don’t think I ever
sold somebody on a kettlebell program who wasn’t already into kettlebells.
My business was built on people already using kettlebells who wanted a
cooler, better plan for doing so.
Now, it’s one thing to stand up for what you believe and it’s quite
another to turn those beliefs into helpful vehicles. Combine the two and
your powers of persuasion really blossom. Because when you confirm abias (like a love for kettlebells) and then say how that bias can further a
person in some meaningful, productive way, you’ll probably have that
person begging to do business with you. Maybe you’re not even in business
—maybe you just write books and want people to talk about your stories.
Well, same thing. Being persuasive means appealing to people like yourself
—people with similar beliefs and ideas and views of the world—and
offering them a special experience. Novels can certainly do that. So can
music.
Not to overuse my example, but that’s pretty much what I’ve done with
generalism. I’ve told people it’s OK if you’re not the best in the world and,
hey, don’t worry if you’re not, because with the right approach, it’s actually
better if you’re not. So people who are like me—that is, not the best at
anything—will want to hear more. I’m not trying to persuade specialists;
I’m only trying to get the attention of people who already believe in the
position I’m promoting, even if they’ve never thought of it the same way I
have. I’m helping people who are already hot on the idea that they don’t
need or want to be the best in the world; I’m only trying to show how that
idea can be developed. That is persuasion.
FAITH
You might be wondering why in the world I would say faith is a skill, and,
of all things, a foundational skill. Well, I think for a lot of people, faith
doesn’t come as naturally as it does to others. It’s something you have to
practice, because if existence can do anything, it can make you jaded—it
can make you angry and upset and cause you to call into question the point
of being here. There’s a lot of—go ahead, call it what it is—bullshit that
goes on in our lives, a lot of stuff that none of us particularly like or can
make sense of. For example, deer ticks. But also the nuclear arms race,
polio, and smog. All of these are seriously awful situations, and sometimes
such things make you wonder whether this is all just one big put-up job. It’s
no wonder nihilism is growing. I spent a few years in that department
myself. It was certainly an experience.
So, yes, I would say faith is a skill, and I think it’s a necessary one.I think people sometimes equate faith with credulity: “Oh, you just
believe things without evidence.” But that isn’t what faith is—at least that
isn’t what faith should be. This is why I like Saint Thomas Aquinas with his
“preambles to faith” or what we would call “philosophy.” Essentially, he
says, Here are the reasons we have for believing the world isn’t just some
random, pitiless accident, and why we can trust in God’s plan. Now, let’s
figure out what to do about it. Aquinas’s whole point, though, was to show
that faith was meant to be not infra-rational but rather supra-rational—that
is, on the far, not near, side of reason. Faith, in other words, is simply
trusting in that which you have good reason to believe. Many subsequent
philosophers agreed. This was a turning point for me. Because for most of
my life, I was anything but a person of faith—I was, indeed, a person of
science, of facts, and of reason. Faith just seemed like unnecessary woo-
woo. If it couldn’t be measured empirically, then what was the point? Or so
I thought.
Then one day I got into an argument with a religious person (as I called
people of belief at the time), and straightaway we quarreled over the
existence of God. I accused him of believing in things with no evidence,
and he responded by asking what sort of evidence I required to change my
mind. I said something scientific would be nice, don’t you think? He replied
that I had simply made a categorical mistake and that no clear-thinking
religious person sees God as just another entity within the universe—some
big, bearded warlock in the sky twirling his beard or twisting his ring—so
to expect to detect him empirically is to have a fundamental
misunderstanding about who God is, to be arguing against something that
God is almost certainly not. He said if God is anything, he is the ultimate,
sole reality—timeless, spaceless, possessed of intellect and will, and so on
—an extremely simple, but extremely powerful mind, in other words. God,
in principle, is not some “thing” to be found under a microscope. And there
went my spaghetti-monster argument, before I could even present it. He
then trotted out a series of logical arguments for the existence of God that I
had never heard before—arguments that were altogether convincing,
arguments that I didn’t even know existed. Now, I don’t recall how
particularly convincing I found them at the time, but they did cause me to
see there was another side of the story, one I had somehow successfullyavoided, maybe because I just never wanted to believe in something like
God.
Long story short, I studied the other side, and after many years of doing
so, reached the conclusion that there was, in fact, good reason for believing
in something greater than myself. That’s where faith comes in. We can’t
“prove” the transcendent (whatever that may be)—at least not scientifically,
because the transcendent is by definition beyond the purview of science.
But we can at least make it reasonably acceptable and likely, or, as
philosophers like to put it, more plausibly true than not. And that’s all a
good argument is for.
All of this, of course, is a return to logic. It’s important once again to
note that faith is not below reason, but rather above it. Again, faith is on the
far, not the near, side of logic. And that’s why it’s a skill. Anything less is
credulity, maybe even gullibility.
In trying to figure out what faith is, I’ve decided it can be nothing more
(and certainly nothing less) than trusting in that which you have good
reason to believe. But you still have to take that wee bit of a leap. You still
have to trust in that which you have good reason to believe. It’s like being
married. I can’t verify that my wife loves me, at least not empirically, and to
even suggest conducting such an experiment would cause me a
considerable amount of grief. But I have good reason to believe that she
does, in fact, love me. I’m trusting in that which I have good reason to
believe.
There is one problem with having faith that I forgot to mention, and that
problem is this: as soon as you believe in something greater than yourself,
you must accept there’s a reason for being here that transcends your selfish,
little ego. That means it can no longer be just about you, you, you all the
time. It now must be about something else and something more. Life
probably isn’t about how much money you can make or how famous you
get or how many awards you acquire. Faith takes not only practice to have
but practice to live out, since true faith—true belief—means turning
yourself over to some greater plan, becoming an instrument, if you will, of
divine intercession.
While I was writing this book, there came a point when I was extremely
annoyed. Resistance was high. Deadlines were tight. Patience was short. So
I was a bit snippy with people and not quite as polite as I should have been.I decided to take a break that day to visit a local church to see if I could
pray it out, a practice I wasn’t particularly sold on at the time. On my way
to the church, I nonetheless asked God if he wouldn’t mind sending a
spiritual pick-me-up. I requested something nice, something cheerful. Like
the sighting of a dove, say. I told God things were a little stressful right
now, so if he could work this one small favor for me, well, that would be
nice. And how did God respond to this? I’ll tell you: by putting a kid with
cancer in the very front pew.
Now, before my, I guess you could call it, conversion to faith, I
struggled as so many do with the problem of evil. Why, I would always
wonder, if there is a loving God, would he allow such horrible things to
happen in the world, particularly things like childhood cancer, which I think
we might all agree is at the very top of the list of things that suck and make
absolutely no sense. Eventually I concluded there is at least no logical
contradiction between the two. That is, so long as God may have morally
sufficient reasons beyond our grasp for allowing such atrocities to occur,
then such atrocities are not at conflict with God’s existence—Saint Thomas
Aquinas taught me that. Solving a problem logically is not the same as
solving a problem emotionally. That day, I came a great deal closer to
solving that problem emotionally.
As I walked into the church, we were handed a copy of a song we
would be singing to Ben: “This Little Light of Mine.” Throughout the
service, various groups of people came to offer prayers and support for this
young boy and his family. The church was packed with people of all ages
and types, each giving whatever they could—some flowers, other Legos,
and all of us a lot of love. The priest eventually presented his homily. He
told everybody in the congregation that Ben’s presence was indeed a
miracle in the sense that one particular, catastrophic illness had given so
many people the opportunity to show just how much they love one another
and offer such profound kindness to a family most of them had never met. I
just so happened to agree and began to see a point in something I might
otherwise have written off as utterly barbaric and gross. I began to see how
suffering in some ways might very well be the necessary means for us to
build character traits that would be impossible in a world free of calamity
and sin. This made sense to me, a little bit. I then began to think: if heaven
is real and if we are free agents, then certain incentives ought to be providedfor us to become the kinds of people others wouldn’t mind spending an
eternity with. Without sickness, there can be no caring for the sick, no
compassion. Without wrongdoing, there can be no justice or mercy. But
still. Childhood cancer? Do we really need that? Maybe, in fact, we do.
Maybe it’s because we get so darn lost in the noise, as Flannery O’Connor
once proposed, that God needs to shout. Maybe? I don’t know.
More personal, however, was the sense of perspective this experience
had given me. Who was I to worry about missing a book deadline (God
forbid) while this family and their boy were grappling with arguably the
most impossible struggle of all? Immediately my ego was vanquished, my
petty problems dissolved, and I began to pray. I walked out of church a
delivered man and resolved to remain a delivered man for at least the next
several hours. But at that moment I became solidly convinced of one thing:
God answers our prayers. He might not always give us what we ask for, but
if we’re receptive to subtle—or in some cases, not so subtle—hints, we’ll
find he is always willing to give us what we need, and then some.
OK, great—how does all this play into becoming better at (almost)
everything? I’ll tell you. Faith is the ultimate—and perhaps only—way of
orienting yourself toward happiness. It’s what drives your efforts and goals
in a direction that actually will fulfill you and actually could make a
difference in the world. Look, I’m a believer in capitalism (if that hasn’t
already come across), but if it’s being conducted by people of good
conscience, all the better. Because then we wouldn’t need the stupid
government to keep interfering with things, which almost always has the
effect of making the problem worse than it was to begin with. What’s that
Harry Browne quote, the one about government being the only entity that
could ever make you feel grateful for handing you a crutch after breaking
your leg? I like Harry Browne. He knew things.
Just imagine if all people were rooted in a sense of higher purpose. We
probably wouldn’t have much, if any, need for the EPA or the IRS or
international trade agreements. People would stop doing things just because
they were profitable and start doing things more because they were good.
Obviously, I’m fantasizing. Utopia is not of this world. People would still
have to do hard and dirty jobs to pay their bills, and people are by no means
angels. But you can’t tell me things wouldn’t at least significantly improve
if everybody were rooted in a sense of something greater—somethingbeyond themselves. Now, I’m not saying without faith you can’t be a good
or moral person—I’m not saying that at all. I’m just saying if your
worldview is one of ultimate meaninglessness, then you don’t have much of
a reason to be. That’s what Nietzsche taught me. I like Nietzsche. He also
knew things, at least some things. I think he was wrong on that most
fundamental premise of reality, but darn if he wasn’t consistent all the way
to his conclusion.
That’s one big reason we need to practice—and notice I didn’t say
“have”—faith. Not the I-go-to-church-on-Sundays or I-read-a-spiritual-
book-once kind of faith, but a deep, abiding love of humanity and God.
Faith is the orienting mechanism, as I said. It’s what can drive you and give
you a why so enormous and unshakable and profound. You’re not working
out just because you want a set of abs or learning guitar just so you can get
with groupies. No. You’re doing things for reasons so much more
meaningful than that. You’re building a skill stack so you can change the
world—maybe even save it—and serve some greater purpose in life.
Having a why—having faith—is what will keep your butt in the chair or get
your butt to the gym. You’ve got to offer it up.
Now, take it a step further. Faith compels not only trust but virtue. In
other words, it’s not just about what you believe but also about the kind of
person you become because of that belief. This again is very Aristotelian
(Aristotle argued that the point of knowing and making and doing good
things was, at least in part, to build positive character traits). You do good
things because doing is becoming.
Therefore, morality is about not only the acts you perform but the sort
of person you’re shaped into because of them. Here again is where faith can
either help or hurt, depending on how well you understand it. You want to
do the right things, but you also want to do them for the right reasons.
Because good acts without good intentions don’t make a better person, do
they? You’ve gotta want to do the thing you know you’re supposed to, if
you get what I mean. For me, that was always the hardest part. I was
charitable before I had faith; I just didn’t particularly want to be. Mostly my
generosity was driven by my desire to buy myself a good night’s sleep.
Now it’s driven by love . . . mostly. I had to work at that and am still doing
so. It’s part of my spiritual practice.We can argue that, at the end of your life, faith is the only skill that’s
going to matter. Ninja skills, writing skills, your abilities as a salesperson—
none of that is coming with you—and neither is your Beanie Baby
collection, your bank account, or that Cayman GT4. What you will be
remembered for is the person you were and how you affected others. This
point was made painfully obvious to me when my grandfather passed. He
was a man I never considered to be the epitome of success, when I was
growing up. He had a lower-middle-class job and lived in an upper-lower-
class neighborhood. He never seemed to aspire to anything. But that’s only
because I had the wrong view of aspiration. My grandfather aspired to
everything, because he aspired to love people and be a man of faith. And he
accomplished both. He was the one who always held me on his shoulder as
a crying babe, came to all my sporting events (however insignificant),
volunteered constantly at charity events, and never missed a Sunday
sermon. His was the most crowded funeral I ever saw. People lined up
around the building like at a midnight premiere for a summer blockbuster.
And that’s when I realized he had a skill that was fundamental and essential
and utterly lacking in my own life. If I had died that day, I doubt if even
most of my own family would have shown up. For me, the line would have
been like one at a matinee of a movie that’s been out for three months.
My grandfather taught me that faith was not just believing but also
trying really hard to make good on those beliefs, no matter how many times
you fail or don’t live up to your own expectations. We’re all going to fail
and to some extent we’re all going to suck at having faith—especially at
first. But that’s what makes it a skill. Repetition and Resistance. Integration
> Isolation. Just start with small acts of goodness and giving. Bring water to
the thirsty and food to the hungry, and offer somebody who looks
downtrodden an unexpected compliment. Meditate and pray at home or in
church, but then bring your faith out into the world. Then take on more
challenges. Maybe work a mission trip in there somewhere. Or here’s a
challenging one: tithe. Let me tell you, tithing is tough: you have all these
plans for the money you’re making—vacations, retirement, clothes,
whatever—and then you go and just give it away. Don’t tell me that’s an
easy thing to do. (Maybe for some people it is, but certainly it wasn’t for
me.) Don’t tell me faith isn’t a skill.Yes, make gobs of money doing good and then give gobs of money
away to an even greater good. But don’t stop there and don’t be afraid to get
your hands dirty. Go out and do the good acts yourself. Prep the meals. Visit
the poor. Wash the feet of some very sick person. If you tell me these things
are hard, I’ll tell you: I know.
Honestly, I’m not trying to be pushy about religion. Which reminds me,
a friend of mine goes to a church whose motto is “friendly, not cultish.” I
like that. I think it makes sense. That’s another person who knows this:
Whatever religion you are, or whatever religion you aren’t, faith should be
attractive because it’s beautiful and because of the good things it gets
people to do and because of how it brings people together. You don’t
believe in God because you want eternal fire insurance. That’s not what
faith is about. You believe in God because you love the world and want to
save it and because you love Him and everything He’s given to you.
Faith will stop you from taking shortcuts. Faith will give you the
framework you need to engage in fulfillment. If you need a practice plan,
start with this: When you meditate or pray in the morning, you don’t need
to make it just an exercise in focus. You can make it a spiritual workout, as
well. Start there.
ONE-PAGE SPIRITUAL PRACTICE PLAN
Morning Meditation
Spend five to fifteen minutes in mindfulness meditation. Use a
guided app to get started if you need to. The skill being developed is
focus, and the benefit is presence and awareness. This will flow into
all the rest of your life. Be sure to do it every day.
Midafternoon Affirmations/Prayer
Whatever your religious orientation, prayer is a powerful and
transformative practice. (Affirmations also tend to work well.) So
spend five to fifteen minutes on prayer every day, whether recitingaffirmations, chanting mantras, praying the rosary, or praying in
whatever way your religion suggests or you feel comfortable. (I
prefer to do this in the midafternoon, though I will sometimes stack
this with my morning meditation session; prayer, I’ve found, can
often be a steadying force to lead into meditation.) There are no
strict rules here, aside from that you should try to stick with one
prayer or form initially, in order to set up a pattern for yourself.
Evening Journal Session
Finally, spend five to ten minutes every night reflecting upon your
day in a positive manner. Don’t just record what you did; rather,
explain why you’re grateful for whatever happened. This simple
exercise gets you into the habit of seeing the good in things—and
seeing that life itself is good—a much-needed habit in a society that
constantly slams us with bad news.
Recommended Additional Reading
Mere Christianity (C. S. Lewis).Chapter Six
SKILLS YOU MAY BE
INTERESTED IN (BUT MAY NOT
NEED)
T
his next step is easy. Start getting good at the things you want to get
good at.
This is not so much a next step as it is a simultaneous step—there’s no
reason to wait to develop your interests. The metaskills, while foundational,
don’t have to come first. It’s better if they come sooner than later, but this is
why we have a practice method and Short-Term Specialization and all that
—so we can get better at many things instead of just one.
What are your interests? What do you want to get better at? There are
no rules here, really. The only thing I would suggest is this: if you’re going
to get good at something, make it something you want to get good at. That
sounds like a truism. And that’s because it’s true. Remember when we
talked about discipline and how the only way to develop discipline is by
practicing discipline, and the only way to practice discipline without
already having discipline is by doing something you like? Well, it’s time to
find that something that you like.
When I was growing up, I went through a long stretch of being a
seriously bad student. I’d skip class and refuse to do homework. Once, I got
in-school suspension for showing my underpants to my German teacher.
Some thought I was a degenerate. The truth is, I wasn’t so much a
degenerate as I was disinterested in all the subjects I was supposed to learnin school. I didn’t really care about calculus. I didn’t really care about
German, either. Looking back, I wish I had paid better attention to both,
because now I see the value in these things—well, maybe not German, but
French would be nice. Unfortunately, nobody ever taught me that math was
a way of learning logic—instead, math was just a way of learning math,
which I thought was a skill with limited value when it came to high-level
branches such as calculus. I would have been interested in logic. Maybe.
It’s easy to say that now. Mostly back then I was interested in music.
This is why, even as a terrible student, I’d spend hours practicing guitar.
It wasn’t that I didn’t have any motivation; it was just that my motivation
chased a separate set of interests than what was being taught at school. This
is what I want for you. I want you to develop whatever makes you most
excited. Yes, we need some “liberal arts”—and that’s why we have those
foundational skills, and that’s why I took so much time explaining why I
think they’re important. Maybe you’re interested in those, or maybe you’re
not, but over time, I think you will be. Either way, let’s get started with the
things you like.
What do you like? Woodworking? Painting? Gardening? Cooking?
Training dogs? You can make a business out of just about anything you can
be good at.
Well, let’s return to music. Let’s say you’re interested in drums—or you
know what, scratch that—guitar. Drums are cool, but I know guitar, so let’s
go with guitar. Say you want to make music and you want people to pay
you to do it. And say you want to grow your hair out and get it highlighted.
I think that would be just fine.
Let’s go back to a few of our principles. If you’re starting a new skill,
the first thing to do is to short-term specialize in it. This goes for guitar and
it goes for anything that isn’t guitar. I would say you should dedicate at
least an hour of practice a day to anything you’re short-term specializing in.
That’s a reasonable start. You could do more, depending on the skill, and in
some cases, you could do less—there’s not an exact prescription for this.
You need to use some judgment to decide how much practice is necessary
and how much is too much or too little. When in doubt, ask someone who’s
figured it out. Hire a coach, in other words.
Next let’s consider Integration > Isolation. What kind of guitar player
do you want to be? Do you want to be a rock player, a jazz player, a countryguitar player? Or maybe you want to be a generalist with your guitar
playing? Certainly, I wouldn’t argue against that. Still, you’ll have to pick a
place to start, so let’s say you want to learn to rock. Let’s say that whenever
you hear Metallica, it sends a yellow streak up your spine, because if
something can get you going like that, it’s a skill worth investing in; you
probably think that it’s cool and resonate with it. Imagine all the things in
your life that do that. Maybe it’s reading a piece of writing or watching a
comedian or solving a math problem. I can’t tell you what you might be
interested in. I can only tell you how to get better at that thing, once you
determine what it is.
For me, there are now quite a number of things that fill me with giddy
excitement. I’m not actually a huge sports fan, but I can see why people get
into it. Debating I love—boy, do I get giddy when someone gives a great
argument on stage, something I only started to appreciate after I joined the
debate team in middle school. What else? I get giddy over yo-yo tricks
sometimes, though I’m not sure I get quite giddy enough to want to
dedicate my life to learning them. But still, it’s enough to cause me to learn
at least a little bit. I get giddy over philosophy and science, and certainly I
get giddy over growing businesses. Finally, I get giddy over God. Faith gets
me triply giddy. These are my interests, most of them, anyway. Now it’s
time to identify a few of your own.
You might not even know your interests at first. Maybe you have a few
fleeting areas you’re interested in, a few suspects in the lineup, so to speak.
But maybe you’re not positive because you’ve never spent time practicing
them. That’s the test, because to the extent you love something, you won’t
mind practicing it, despite the endless frustrations that are absolutely
destined to occur. I remember watching a clinic by one of my favorite
guitarists back in high school, and at one point someone from the audience
asked him how he found so much time to practice guitar. He said, seeming
almost confused, “Because I want to play the guitar?” To him it wasn’t a
valid question. Of course he found the time to practice the guitar. Because
he wanted to play the guitar. How simple. I mean, of course!
If you want to do something, you’re going to find the time to do it. This
isn’t a question about making time or scheduling or anything like that. This
is a question about what moves you. This is a question about what matters
most in your life. Now, hopefully, I’ve done a fair job explaining whatshould matter most in your life—in case it isn’t clear, I’m not exactly a
moral relativist. Aristotle taught us that there is only one right way to live
and that one right way is living well. A truism? Perhaps. But isn’t it still
true?
Aristotle also taught us that living well means focusing ourselves
around certain interests, developing virtue, and—most important—seeking
the good. Aquinas, his successor in many ways, defined happiness even
more specifically when he said it involves engaging in and enjoying
genuinely good activities and doing so to the extent that both the effects and
intentions are morally good, or, at the very least, neutral. So there are not
too many restrictions here. If you follow these sages, you can align your
interests to produce actual, real, authentic happiness. In other words,
something isn’t good just because you desire it. Rather, there are things that
are really good for you, so those are the things you should desire.
Aristotle said this:
He is happy who lives in accordance with complete virtue and is
sufficiently equipped with external goods, not for some chance
periods but throughout a complete life.
And Aquinas wrote this:
It is impossible for any created good to constitute man’s happiness.
For happiness is that perfect good which entirely satisfies one’s
desire; otherwise it would not be the ultimate end, if something yet
remained to be desire. Now the object of the will, i.e., of a man’s
desire, is what is universally good; just as the object of the intellect
is what is universally true. Hence it is evident that nothing can
satisfy man’s will, except what is universally good. That is to be
found, not in any creature, but in God alone.
What does this mean? Actually, it’s simple. It means that while we’re
alive, perfect happiness can’t be attained, but certainly a large degree of it
can be, and that would be through the prudent accumulation of knowledge,
virtue, wealth, and friendship. People hear that word wealth and they’relike, Ew, was Aristotle some sort of fat capitalist or something? I don’t
think so. But he did recognize the importance of having your material needs
met. Aristotle was basically saying that it’s hard to be happy when you’re
starving to death. He even went so far as to distinctly declare that wealth
should be possessed—as with most other material things—in moderation. It
should be deliberately built, but not to excess. In other words, make a lot of
money if you want, but don’t do it only for yourself. In fact, you should
probably give most of it away if that’s the case.
That might sound unappealing to a lot of people, but think of the kind of
character it builds if you profit for the sake of doing good rather than for the
sake of stockpiling wealth. I guess you could see this as a metric of sorts, a
way of measuring priority—the person who makes a lot of money but then
gives most of it away is doing things for reasons other than making money,
which is doing things for a better reason. We’ll get back to talking about
practicing your interests in a second, but this is important.
I can tell you that Aristotle is absolutely right about this, because there
was a time in my life when I had gotten pretty good at making money—and
frankly, I still am. I had a goal upon leaving college of making a million
dollars before I was twenty-seven, and I accomplished that goal. And I had
the fast, yellow Porsche and ate at all the nice, fancy restaurants and
vacationed at all the ritziest, goldenest places, and you know what? I’m not
going to say I was miserable—that certainly was not the case. But I wasn’t
particularly happy either. That is, I wasn’t particularly fulfilled. Rather, it
was this constant game of cat and mouse, in which I’d chase a goal, an
object, or something I wanted to do or buy, and then I’d reach that goal, get
that object, or do or buy that something I wanted, and I’d enjoy it for a
while, nibble on it, play with it, or take pictures of it, and then that feeling
would fizzle out. It was very schizophrenic, now that I think about it. The
problem was that I thought happiness was found in having
accomplishments and a nice, big number in my bank account. It turns out I
was mistaken. Happiness is not found that way. Happiness is found in
exactly what Aristotle says—doing and knowing and making good things.
According to Aristotle, happiness is more of a cumulative quality, then,
and something that can only be assessed at the end of one’s life. It’s not like
the sort of happiness of having a “happy childhood” or being glad one
moment and angry the next. It’s more “happy in the sense of flourishing andfulfillment” (eudaimonia is the word in Greek to describe this), and that can
only happen over time. And then, Aquinas would say, to perfect our
happiness, we need to come to know God. Maybe that means getting hit by
a bus or something to figure that one out. Let’s not rush that part! In the
meantime, we can simply pray.
The reason I bring all this up? Again, I just want you to have the right
orientation when deciding on the things you want to get better at; I want
you to engage in them and enjoy them because they are good things to
enjoy, and just about anything can be a good thing to enjoy when done for
the benefit of others and for the right reasons. I think we could even make a
case for cage fighting. But certainly music and writing and mathematics and
biology and really, honestly, just about anything. It’s so important—so very,
very important—to keep the overall goal in mind. We’re moving toward
happiness. We stack skills to not only create advantages but find fulfilment.
OK, end of sermon. Let’s move on.
So, Integration > Isolation. Say you chose guitar and want to learn rock.
Well, then start with a song. Either get someone to teach it to you or pull up
an instructional video on the interweb and take it bit by bit. Right away,
you’ll run into something you can’t do. That something may be learning to
hold the pick the correct way. So you isolate that technique until you get it
right, but don’t rush. Skills take time to set in, and it’s worth spending extra
time on the basics. Your brain works very much like a Crock-Pot, in this
way. You plop in all these ingredients by practicing them, and then at some
point you just need to set it and forget it. Come back the next day and
everything will have hopefully blended. As you get better, you sometimes
need a longer cooking time. Initial skills are sort of like cooking lettuce.
You don’t need all that much time to take in all the beginner stuff and ready
it for use in a much larger recipe. Later, you’ll get onto roasting chuck, the
higher-level skills that take a lot more time to soften and set in. Whether
that’s sweep picking or doing a freestanding handstand, your patience will
need to increase as your practice time remains steadfast and dedicated.
Remember, you’re always working toward some specific goal even as
you are practicing techniques in isolation. Maybe that goal is to perform
“Smoke on the Water” in your living room in front of your grandparents or
to do your first set of five pull-ups—but whatever the goal is, be sure you
have one, and be sure you’re working toward that goal in some capacity atall times. Don’t just practice techniques to practice techniques. Integration >
Isolation. Practice the techniques you need to learn in order to do the things
you want to do, and practice them in a context that is as close as possible to
the context in which they’ll be performed.
Let’s take the example of another skill at this point: writing.
Say you want to be a humor writer and you want to write jokes, whether
you want to do stand-up, write stories and columns, or perhaps be a staff
writer for a comedy show. I think that’s great. Part of your practice then,
will be reading and listening to all the funniest people you can find. Just
like part of the practice for any musician would be listening to the
musicians and instrumentalists they want to be like. After this, you’ll
actually need to sit down and write. Obviously, if you want to be a humor
writer, you’ll need to practice writing thoughts that make people laugh.
Grammar and syntax may need to be isolated, but this should again be done
in the direction of the goal. I think what you’ll find with humor writing is
that sometimes you’ll want to intelligently break the rules of grammar and
syntax to achieve a certain effect, like writer Ring Lardner was so
exceptional at—for example, in his book The Young Immigrunts:
Are you lost daddy I asked tenderly.
Shut up he explained.
You might analyze that snippet to try to examine what makes it funny.
Part of it, certainly, would be the element of surprise. Nobody really
explains “shutting up” to someone, do they? (As if this needs to be
explained—and such is the problem with attempting to dissect humor; it
dies in the process.) But when coming from the perspective of a kid, it kind
of makes sense. It gave you an idea, though: maybe you want to try to write
a short story from the perspective of your childhood, and maybe you want
to bring out the absurdities of family road trips. Great. I think that’s a
surefire way to get a laugh out of almost anybody. Who doesn’t have
material they can use from family road trips gone awry? If you want, you
could borrow some of mine. I’ve got quite a surplus.
This is Integration > Isolation. You’re practicing writing, but you’re
practicing specifically in the context you want to get better at. Now, if I
were doing this, I’d want to highlight something about how my mom wouldfall asleep in the passenger seat while driving out east, and how half the
time she’d still have a cigarette in her mouth. What would happen next is
that the cigarette would drop onto her lap and my dad would scream,
“Goddamnit, Judy!” and we’d all become hysterical and the whole van
would start to rock and swerve. My mom would awake with a start and
search frantically for the lit cigarette and attempt to flick it out the window.
The only problem was that half the time the window wasn’t open, so it
would typically bounce and burn itself out on one of the armrests. This isn’t
much of a story in this format, but that’s OK. The first operation of any
writing project is to just get something down. You can shape it into
something more exciting later. Start with a very rough first draft.
All creative efforts are done in segments. You write songs by coming up
with simple melodies and stories by devising simple themes. The details,
the nuances, the tone, the decoration of language—all that can be added in
layers. The key for any skill, whether you’re practicing technique or
actively creating, is to get started and work toward the goal in mind.
Obviously, Repetition and Resistance are also tucked into this. You
can’t integrate or isolate if you’re not practicing a skill and increasing the
demands as you go. Perhaps you move from learning to hold a pick to
strumming a chord, or from writing three hundred words to writing five
hundred to a thousand. Just be sure that however you’re increasing
resistance, it remains in line with the goal. Don’t make things harder
without making them relevant, in other words. I used to do this with guitar a
lot: I’d learn a number of high-level techniques that took immense amounts
of time to master (like sweep picking), but they just weren’t all that useful
for the kinds of music I wanted to play, especially for the kinds of music
people want to listen to. I was falling into the snare of specialization, of
wanting to be better just to be better rather than wanting to be better in
order to be good.
Let’s look at martial arts now. Anybody here have an interest in
fighting? Great. Because maybe you had a rough childhood or maybe
you’ve got a lot of pent-up frustration. I’m not saying martial arts is going
to cure that, but I can say it helped me find a productive, physical outlet.
But what would the principles of generalism look like when applied to this?
Well, pretty much the same. You start with the end in mind. Is your goal to
compete, or do you want to be more of a showman? When I first started taekwon do, I wanted to compete. That meant I spent most of my time
practicing the strikes that were most useful as part of the sport, particularly
roundhouse kicks. But eventually I got deeper into the aesthetic side of the
martial art, which meant I could then spend more time on some of the high-
flying acrobatics and techniques—moves that aren’t especially useful when
fighting people but certainly look cool.
I remember my coach would have me drill kicks for thousands of reps
and sometimes we’d have to break the kicks down into steps. That was
isolation, but it was all toward integration, as well. We never practiced a
kick I wasn’t going to use soon. The same with punches and forms and self-
defense. A lot of times we had to break things down on a granular level. I
think this is something you have to do with pretty much any skill, but you
should always know why you’re doing it. The reason for such slow,
technique isolation is that the goal is eventual, seamless integration.
Sometimes (often, actually) you need to pull things out of context to get
them to work while in context. So you repeat and repeat (repetition), and
you get closer and closer (resistance) to bringing that technique into its final
form, whether that’s a competition, performance, or act of creation. It
doesn’t matter what the goal is. The process is ultimately the same.
What about something that isn’t particularly artsy or fantastic? I know
I’ve talked a lot about activities that I’m personally interested in, but there
are also a lot of things that I don’t get particularly excited about, but maybe
you do. For example, forensic analysis. Anybody here want to become a
forensic analyst? No? OK, yup. That’s about what I would expect. What
about marine biology, then? Anybody got a thing for whales or tiger sharks?
Sea stars, maybe? Let’s say that you do. Because this is something I have
no interest or ability in, but I assure you the principles of generalism still
apply. Take the skill of dissection, for example. I don’t particularly know
how relevant this is to marine biology, but I’m guessing marine biologists
dissect things, and certainly dissection is a skill. I know because in second
grade I had to cut open an octopus. Frankly, it was disgusting. But I
remember we started with just a small procedure for practice and then
moved on to the final operation. We were isolating so we could integrate. I
forget now what we were even trying to discover, but I remember distinctly
that there was progression to it. There was a goal. And that goal was broken
down into small, little bits for us to practice. Obviously, none of usconducted a clean operation. (One kid just put the octopus on his head and
pretended it was sucking his brains out. This boy quickly became a
classroom hero.) It would be insulting to any great dissector to insinuate
that a second grader could master the skill in just one lesson. I don’t know
enough about dissection to say how long this skill takes to develop, but I
know enough about skills in general to say that it can’t be acquired
overnight.
The point is this: it doesn’t matter what you’re interested in. The only
thing that matters is that you figure out how to apply the principles of
generalism so you practice it in the most efficient way, toward the outcome
you want. And you do so while keeping the bigger picture in mind: in some
capacity, you remain oriented toward happiness and flourishing and helping
others.
Finally, as you build your interests on top of the foundational skills we
covered earlier, you’ll develop a strong and sturdy base from which to
launch a career or a business. There is one last, remaining element,
however. Even if you build those foundational metaskills to prepare and
direct yourself, and even if you get really, really good at the things that
interest you on top of that, there often remains a chasm. That chasm is the
gap between taking your good-to-great ability and combining it with all the
other skills you have, and then bringing it forward into the world and,
preferably, getting paid to do so.
And it is to that particular topic that we turn now.Chapter Seven
SKILLS YOU MAY NEED (BUT
MAY NOT BE INTERESTED IN)
N
ow you’ve gotten good at all these different things, and you want to
do something with everything you’ve learned; you want to bring your skills
into the world. Awesome. Great. Fantastic. Superb. The good news is you
might not have all that much work to do. Between making friends, being
able to think straight, and being good at skills people are interested in,
you’d be surprised at how things simply start to align. People might want to
pay you to teach them something, or they might want you to perform or to
do a service. But things may not always align so easily. There may be times
when you need to reposition yourself and what you offer to make it
attractive to people.
Let’s see if we can cover the entire study of economics in just a few
short sentences, because I think that will help you see how you should
position your skills to the world.
People are rational animals, remember. That means they think about
things and make decisions for themselves. But what are they deciding
about? At first, it may seem like people make all kinds of different choices,
but mostly that’s a mirage.
People typically make only one decision, and that is based on whatever
they think will make them happiest. They’re trying to be content, and
there’s pretty much no scenario we can think of where people make choices
they think will lead to their unhappiness. Even people who perform
amazing acts of self-sacrifice are doing so because they’ve shaped theircharacter to such an extent that those self-sacrificial acts are what makes
them happy. (This would be an example of aligning your interests to
something that is really good, as opposed to aligning your interests to
something that is not. Either way, you are interested in something because
you think that something will make you happy. But if Aristotle was right,
then certain things have a greater propensity to produce happiness than
others, and those are the things you should desire—but all that is really for
another book.) But we don’t need to analyze every decision people make in
order to arrive at the obvious conclusion that they make choices they think
will make them happy either now or later. In fact, even if people are doing
something they don’t particularly feel like doing now, like waking up early
to go to work, that’s only because they know they will be far less happy
later if they don’t go to work and then get fired.
What have we covered so far?
Point 1: People are rational.
Point 2: They make decisions because they want to be happy.
Now, sometimes people also make mistakes. Just because humans are
rational doesn’t mean they make all the right decisions; sometimes they
make very wrong decisions. But that isn’t what we mean by rationality. By
rationality, we simply mean that people think about things and weigh
decisions, but they may do this imperfectly. They may make a wrong
choice, or they may not have the information they need in order to make
that correct decision, even if there is one. But again, people make decisions,
and they use their rationality to pursue what they think will make them
happy. This is the most fundamental principle of economics: purposeful
behavior.
People will do what they think is best in order to get the things they
want—whether they are right or not is another story. A very large part of
this process means trading things with other people, in the form of either
buying or selling. That’s another fundamental principle of economics:
voluntary exchange. A person will buy or sell something only because they
believe they will be better off as a result of the exchange. In other words,
people will buy or sell something only when they believe they are going to
profit from it, and by profit, we simply mean increase their subjective levelof happiness. Nobody will ever buy anything, and nobody will ever sell
anything, if they think they’ll be less happy after doing so—that is, at a loss.
You can’t even imagine a situation when this would be the case, unless, of
course, the situation was forced, as in a robbery or taxes.
An economy grows because different people think different things will
make them happy. People value different items and services, and to
different extents, so they can make exchanges and both parties can profit.
Somebody who sells a car for $1,300 is happier with the $1,300, and the
person who buys the car for $1,300 is happier with the car. Both parties
have profited, assuming the exchange was voluntary. We needn’t worry that
everybody will want the same things and fight over them, because not
everybody wants the same things, to the same extent, or at the same time.
This is why the principle of voluntary exchange is so powerful and
productive; it allows people to increase their subjective level of happiness
by trading goods and services freely with others, whereby everybody
benefits.
At this point, maybe you’re asking, “OK, Pat, why does all of this
matter to me?” It matters because it helps us to understand why people buy
things and why they might be willing to pay us. Here we are with these
really cool sets of skills, but just because we have these skills doesn’t mean
people are going to pay us to use them. We have to make a value
proposition; we have to show people how our skills can make them happier.
Maybe you’re solving some problem they’re having, or maybe you’re
helping them grow in some way. We don’t need to know exactly what that
value proposition is—and, to be fair, it will vary wildly from person to
person and from skill to skill—we only need to know that in order to get
paid to do what we love, we must understand how what we love can make
other people happy and, furthermore, how to convey that message most
effectively to them. You can’t just say, “Hey, I know martial arts,” and
expect people to pay you for it. But maybe there’s a parent whose kid keeps
getting beat up and they want to teach them how to defend themselves. So
maybe that’s your value proposition—you teach anti-bullying. Certainly,
people are willing to pay for that. We know this because they do.
That’s actually the first step in getting paid to do what you love. Look at
and be a student of markets. Study how people are already spending money,
and determine if and how that matches up to skills you already have. Lookat the people who are most successful doing something, and try to discern
what skills they have that you don’t. This is where we complete our skill
stack. We identify the few remaining missing skills that will maximally
convey our value to the world, skills that will cause people to want to do
business with us.
When I was starting out in fitness, I looked at entrepreneurs who were
doing really well online, and a lot of them weren’t in any better shape than I
was. So I knew it must have been something other than having great abs or
a heavy deadlift that made them successful—again, they were generalists,
not specialists. Eventually, I found a lot of them were good at things like
advertising and copywriting and all these other business skills about which I
knew nothing. I did have the foundation of being a writer, even if I wasn’t
an advertising writer. But the more I looked, the more I saw how important
the skill of writing an effective advertisement seemed to be. I decided to
pick up a few books on copywriting and learned how to write compelling
headlines and catchy blog titles and whatnot, and, wouldn’t you know, my
audience grew.
I also saw that people more successful than me were good at selling
things. They knew how to make their messages ooze with so-called sex
appeal. They knew how to speak in such a way to their audience that doing
business with them would, in fact, increase their audience’s personal
happiness. Whether they knew it or not, they understood that most
fundamental law of economics. They knew about human action. And they
knew how to attract it. They knew how to make and offer programs,
services, or goods that spoke directly to the problems people looking for
fitness solutions wanted. Their messages were so targeted, so precise. It’s
no wonder they were successful.
I knew I needed to learn about copywriting and how to sell things; I
knew I needed to learn how to make my value known. Because that’s all
selling is: it’s positioning what you have in such a way that people see it as
an answer to their problem. Almost everybody has a problem that
somebody with a particular skill has the power to solve—the only problem
(for you, anyway) is that most of them don’t see it that way. Your job is to
make them see it that way.
I was already good at writing and fitness but I sucked at sales, so this
became a need-based skill for me. It became something I needed to getbetter at to make a living by doing what I loved. That’s why I studied it, and
maybe you’ll need to do the same. I’m not saying selling is a fundamental
skill. I think it’s a need-based skill. Not every successful person is also a
phenomenal salesperson—some people just create stuff that people want so
badly it literally sells itself, which tells you a lot about the nature of sales.
Though a lot of successful people are indeed very good salespeople. Plus, a
lot of selling is baked into that fundamental skill of persuasion. Selling
focuses more on specifics, like how to price goods or services and how to
position yourself in a specific market or environment. But all those
specifics are pointless without a more fundamental understanding of
persuasion to begin with.
Selling, to the extent it moves beyond persuasion, boils down to this:
people pay only for the things they want. If you hope to be successful, you
need to sell the things that people want. It doesn’t matter how persuasive
you are otherwise—how many people like you and want to hang out with
you or come to your birthday party—if you’re not selling something that
solves a problem for people, ain’t nobody going to buy it. The best advice I
can offer about selling isn’t to study high-pressure sales techniques; rather,
it is to focus your salable skill in a way that will make it of interest to other
people. In other words, give the people what they want and are asking for.
Try to make something so attractive that it sells itself. Now, generally that
isn’t going to happen, but it’ll make your sales job a heck of a lot easier. (In
some cases, people may want something not because it’s entirely necessary
but because it’s tied to some sort of social status—for example, the iPhone
Whatever-Version-It-Is-Now. The fear of missing out is a major motivator
for a lot of people. People often want what almost everybody else has, even
if that thing isn’t needed for a good or happy life.)
Think first about what you love and how you can use it to help people.
If you’re a writer, what can you do to sell your writing? Because let’s be
honest, it might be difficult to become famous from a novel before
anybody’s ever heard of you. What if you taught writing courses or wrote
advertisements or something like that? That at least offers a service to fulfill
a demand and can provide the income and exposure you need to launch that
novel you’ve been so desperately scribbling. You have to think creatively—
just like you do in your writing. This is what generalism is about, and it’s
what can help you break free: sometimes you use one skill (or subset of askill) to subsidize another. I’ve used my more sellable skills of fitness and
writing to subsidize my—I’m not gonna call it “music career,” because it’s
not really a career, but let’s say—musical activity. I’ve been able to get a
good amount of attention for my music, not because I started as a musician
and grew an audience by playing around in grungy old bars, but because I
built an audience from my stack of skills in fitness and writing. I’ve used
my music on a lot of my workout videos, and over time people started
asking who the artist of a song was. I’d pretend not to be too excited when I
said it was me.
Same thing with the book you now hold in your hands. There’s no way I
would have been able to make this a noteworthy endeavor without first
having established myself in some more specific capacity. I needed fitness
to make myself known before I became the guy who talked about
generalism. I guess the point I’m making is that with your skill stack you
need to start by selling what people want to buy, not what you want them to
buy. Then, over time, as people come to know you, like you, trust you, and
so on, you can shake the system up a bit. At that point, they’ve become
more invested in you as a person—at least, hopefully that’s the case,
assuming you’ve done a good job and delivered the goods.
I’ll give you another example. A friend of mine sells a lot of albums as
a solo guitarist, and people are always asking how he’s been able to make a
living from that. His secret was that he didn’t start by selling albums. He
started by having a YouTube channel that taught people to play the songs
they wanted to learn and then offered courses doing the exact same thing.
Because he provided people with what they wanted (guitar lessons, in some
capacity), they came to know and enjoy him and his style, and as soon as
that started to happen, they began purchasing and reviewing his albums and
talking about them. People on the outside think he got lucky. He didn’t get
lucky. He provided value and eventually that value was returned to him. He
was, and is, a remarkable generalist, very skilled in online advertising and
marketing. All his skills helped build his presence on YouTube, and all his
skills eventually funneled back into doing the one thing he wanted to do
more than anything: create and sell his own music.
But notice the compromise. Notice that he wasn’t content to just make it
selling music online—music that was very good, but music that probably
almost nobody would have ever discovered if he simply decided to put itout there. Rather, he was willing to accept reality and position his skill in
the most helpful way possible to build an audience. After he did this, people
discovered his music because they had already discovered him. And notice
the skill stack: he was great at guitar, great at online advertising, and pretty
good but not great (sorry, Bob) on camera. These few simple skills, when
combined, made this once poor and shabby guitarist into a millionaire.
Again, if there’s a hidden secret to being a generalist, it’s how you can
adapt—it’s how you can use a skill stack to provide value in one area and
fulfill your life’s purpose in another. The specialist doesn’t have this option.
The person who refuses to adapt and insists on making a living by only
selling their music is the person who typically requires a subsidized
lifestyle, from their girlfriend, boyfriend, or grandma. Maybe this is
because they’re too much of a purist, too unwilling to lead with value rather
than their ego. That’s the beauty of capitalism in some ways: it’ll humble
you right quick if you’ve got an attitude like that. If you want to get what
you want, you must be willing to give others what they want. There is very
little room for ego.
So the secret to discerning need-based skills (if there is one) is to
emulate. Look at people who have what you want and are doing what you
want to do. This might mean reading biographies and autobiographies,
which I very, very much recommend that you do. There’s no way to figure
out what a particular skill stack should look like without knowing what you
want to get out of it, and to know what you want to get out of it, you should
look to those who are doing the things you want to do. Just remember to
look at the right things. Remember to emulate the people who are worth
emulating, not those who are simply rich and famous. If you do want to
emulate people who are rich and famous, do so for reasons other than their
wealth and fame.
I remember way back when I was starting out in fitness, reading articles
from somebody who I always thought was so interesting, especially for a
person who was in the workout profession. I always thought he made such
good points and arguments. It wasn’t until I met him about a year later that I
learned he was a history major, and he told me how much that helped infuse
his writings on fitness with such interesting little tidbits. At that point, I
realized I needed to start reading history more. People like hearing about
the history of things.That’s just one small example of how what seems like an unrelated skill
gave this person a very unique perspective on fitness. It made him stand
out. You can look at more popular examples, too. Angus Young is a good
one, since we’re on such an AC/DC kick, and I think what makes him
appealing is that he’s not just a solid guitarist but also such an interesting
showman. People who know Angus know him for his schoolboy outfit and
onstage antics. His guitar playing almost comes second. It’s his duckwalk
and schizophrenic convulsions on stage that make him almost impossible to
ignore—that’s the stuff that people leave an AC/DC concert talking about.
In fact, he often botches his guitar solos because he’s so wild and animated,
but you know what, who cares? It’s a skill stack. It’s funny. You can’t take
your eyes off him. He doesn’t need to be the best to be the best.
Another example is Mark Twain, whom I became absolutely enthralled
with after reading A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court in high
school. People know him as the Great American Novelist, thinking he
probably was something of a specialist, but I would strongly contest that
assertion. Twain to me was the epitome of a generalist—he didn’t just read
and write. Twain studied philosophy and history and was arguably one of
America’s first stand-up comedians. Someone once remarked that Twain
wasn’t a writer who performed—he was a performer who wrote. Not only
that, but he was trained to be a steamboat pilot and a businessperson. He
was quite smart when it came to marketing and selling books; he didn’t
become popular by coincidence, mind you. The man was practiced and
learned in so many respects. In fact, he’s one of the reasons I became
interested in more than just one thing: the more I studied Twain, the more I
saw just how inseparable all his variegated skills were from his success.
But how about somebody who isn’t a writer or a fitness person? How
about someone like Benjamin Franklin? Now, does anybody need to be
convinced that Benjamin Franklin was a generalist? Was there anything you
can think of that Benjamin Franklin didn’t do? He created political
cartoons, invented the lightning rod and bifocals, was the first postmaster
general, and was a prominent (to say the least) politician. He was learned in
matters ranging from science and philosophy to diplomacy and sales. All of
them somehow connected for him and made him into the man he was,
someone we all know about almost 230 years after he died. In fact, when
you think about most of the founding fathers, you find men who were allgeneralists. Their skills were far-reaching and diverse, and on top of
everything, most of them even knew how to duel. It was like golf to them.
I don’t want to limit the scope or restrict the kinds of people I think you
should emulate. I think you should emulate whomever you want to (with
certain caveats) and then use the principles of generalism to reverse
engineer whatever set of need-based skills you, well, need.
Now for those caveats: Just keep the focus on the fundamentals, above
all. Always orient your skill stack toward the ultimate outcome of success,
even if the people you’re emulating never quite reached that. You can learn
from those who were successful in business but failures at life—emulate
what made them successful at business; discard what made them failures at
life. While success and money and fame can all be good, they can also not
be good, which is more typically the case. This is why we start with the end
in mind—of doing things because they’re good and because we want to do
them, not because we want to fill our bank accounts per se.
It starts with enjoyment and wanting to help people and know things.
People who teach and do good things for the sake of helping people will be
rewarded with infinite chocolate and no weight gain in heaven. I’m not sure
of a lot, but I’m pretty sure of this. Eternal rewards aside, it’s the happiness
the right type of action brings you in this life that also makes it worth
pursuing.CONCLUSION: REMEMBER, LIFE
IS BEST WITH A SENSE OF
PERSPECTIVE
Y
our brain—does it feel good yet? Is it so full that achievement and
abundance are leaking out of your ears? Do you feel much, much smarter
and able to conquer the world and whatever has held you back from
accomplishing what you want? You know the secrets now, and you didn’t
need the Knights Templar to unlock the Holy Grail. It’s probably easier than
you could have imagined. The key is generalism. Learning a number of
skills and stacking them: metaskills, interest skills, and need-based skills.
So I hand you this golden chalice—OK, it’s a book, and the chalice appears
to be green, not gold, but, well, whatever—as you begin your journey.
Now we start with a practice plan. We treat our schedule like we would
a day at school—like we’re students again, this time in the World School
System. There are different subjects to learn. Which means we need to set
aside the time to practice them, even if we don’t practice them all at the
same time or for the same amount of time. If you ask me, I think this is
tremendous fun.
I think you will find it to be tremendous fun also, especially once you
start to find enjoyment within the process. You will achieve concrete
outcomes—don’t worry about whether this will happen, as they’re
inevitable with the process. When you practice writing, things get written.
When you practice martial arts, people get judo tossed. If people fail to
produce outcomes, it’s because they fail to adhere to process. And they failto adhere to process because they don’t enjoy it—they do it for the wrong
reasons.
I can already hear some objections burbling. How am I ever going to
find the time to do this? I have a job, you know, and kids, and all these
other commitments, man. But what did I say earlier? This isn’t a matter of
time. It’s a matter of priority. I can’t help you find the time. I can only help
you look within yourself to see that your self-actualization, your nibanna, if
you will, is so important that any excuse not to make the time is simply
invalid—you will always fail to make the time as long as you continue to
make that excuse. It’s like the guitarist who raised his eyebrow in confusion
when somebody asked how he found the time to practice as much as he did.
He found the time to play the guitar because he wanted to play the guitar.
It’s not a tautology so much as a truism.
Before we go on, this is something you need to answer for yourself: Do
you want to be better at things? Are you willing to make a mess and get
lost?
If the answer is yes, then it doesn’t matter how little or how much time
you have. People get things done with full schedules and busy careers and a
lot of kids. They get up early and stay up late and use instant coffee when
they need to. Because they want to be better and they want to do things.
Now, I can’t get you to see that being better and doing things is important; I
can only tell you it’s important and hope that you see my point and don’t
have to learn these lessons by putting off life until you’re ninety-seven and
regretting everything. I don’t want you to regret everything. I don’t want
you to regret anything. I want you to finish your life knowing you did the
best you could with what you had. Because that’s enough. But anything less
isn’t enough—then you’re not fulfilling your nature; you’re not acting
according to reason; you’re not doing the things that God put you on the
planet to do. This, of course—to pursue our own human flourishing—
would be your ontological duty.
As for the fundamentals, you should start the day with meditation and
reflection and prayer. You could also exercise. Then you should do
whatever you’re specializing in. Devote your biggest and most productive
chunk of time to that. Often, this will be an interest skill, but not always.
Sometimes you need to specialize in the fundamentals or need-based skills,
especially at first. Not every “class,” in other words, needs to be the samelength. Especially not since you’re essentially homeschooling yourself.
Classes should be whatever length they need to be to maximize efficiency
and effectiveness of practice. Sometimes shorter is better; sometimes longer
is better. But it should always be the least you need, because if you give
yourself too much time to do something, you might spend a lot of that time
with your hand in your pants. Do you think Aristotle would be happy to
hear about that? I don’t think so. Personally, I think Aristotle would be very
displeased.
Guilt is good, but deadlines can also help keep your hand out of your
pants. Don’t give yourself any longer than you need to be productive at the
task at—I’m hesitating to say—hand. Clearly it would be impossible to set
a specific time frame for how long you should practice each skill, but again,
this is where you look to other people for guidance. See what the teachers
say. This stuff really isn’t all that hard to figure out, I assure you. If you
think it’s hard to figure out, you’re probably just being lazy. You’re using
lack of information as an excuse for not getting to work. Which brings me
to another important point: information as an excuse.
It seems that a lot of people believe they aren’t succeeding because they
don’t have enough information. Some of the time, that’s true. A lot of the
time, however, they have more information than they know what to do with.
I know this almost as much as I know how to eat and breathe, since through
all my years as a fitness coach, the most common complaint from people
was that they had so much information that they didn’t know where to start.
“There’s just too much information,” they would tell me. “It’s all so terribly
confusing.”
When I first got into fitness, I remember being so enthralled by the
sheer amount of information on the internet. I was so excited at the prospect
of getting in shape that I’d spend hours a day reading articles and watching
videos to learn as much as I could on the subject of exercise. And while I
certainly learned a lot, I also absorbed no shortage of pseudoscientific
twaddle along the way. I took in more than I needed to get started and get
ahead, and there even came a point when I spent too much time reading and
too little time doing. A lack of information became an excuse for what was
really a lack of work ethic. I didn’t need to know more; I needed to do
more. I needed to stop reading so many damn fitness articles.I see this a lot. People spend hours reading all the countless articles on
exercise and nutrition. And that’s all well and fine until they forget the
fundamentally more important aspect of self-improvement: actually
practicing the thing they want to get better at.
Read all the articles you want. But at some point you’re going to have to
squat if you want to get stronger. Watch all the handstand tutorial videos
you can find. But only turning yourself upside down on a regular basis will
cause you to finally master one. Burn through every business book you can
get your greedy little hands on. But you’re not going to make a dollar until
you actually attempt to sell something. I’ve come to appreciate this
seemingly obvious but often overlooked notion: the so-called low-
information diet approach, in which you willfully limit the amount of time
you spend acquiring information about something, (hopefully) forcing
yourself to spend more time implementing the information you already
have. (Again, Integration > Isolation.)
I’ve found this approach to be virtually foolproof for calling yourself
out when you should be practicing but instead think it’s somehow an
adequate substitute to just read up more on the thing you’re neglecting to do
—and this is true for nearly any skill, by the way. For example, I used to
fall into this trap constantly when “learning” the guitar. I’d put off
practicing and act as if watching guitar clinics online would accomplish the
same thing. Funny how even though I learned things, I never seemed to
improve until I stopped watching so many damn guitar videos.
This is normally where I’d sit a person down and say, “Listen, my little
iguana, the problem isn’t that you don’t have enough information; the
problem is you don’t know how to take action on the information you do
have.” This is where we go right back to that fundamental principle of
generalism, Integration > Isolation, and go on that low-information diet for
a while. That’s where we consume just the minimum amount of data we
need to get to work and then do exactly that. And only when we feel we
really and truly need more information to move ahead do we seek it out.
Otherwise, we keep our information intentionally limited.
I think people like to hoard information because it gives the illusion of
progress. That may be the case if you’re studying history or something, but
it certainly isn’t the case with any skill that requires perspiration. For most
skills, you want to put action above information. You want to do moredoing than reading. None of this is to say I have something against reading;
I read quite a lot. And that’s because I write quite a lot, so reading is a part
of that practice. I’m also reading only the type of material I’m attempting to
write myself (Integration > Isolation)—I’m not reading to acquire
information just for the sake of saying I know things. I’d rather people say I
can do things because of what I know. Not just that I know things.
Yes, some skills may require more initial information than others, but
the goal should always be to spend less time seeking information and more
time putting it to work. Be a minimalist. Start with the fundamentals, and
take action as early as you can.
Ah yes, to be a minimalist: this brings us to our final point. It seems to
me that if there’s anything left to figure out, it’s how to bring it all together.
I can’t tell you exactly how to do it since I can’t know how long or in what
order or in what way you should practice all the specific skills you
personally want to get better at. But I can give you a mind-set to go along
with the approach I already presented. Let’s talk about minimalism.
Minimalism is doing the least you need to get from A to B, and not a
follicle more. That is, a minimalist is someone who finds themselves at the
crossroads of effectiveness (doing the right things) on the one hand and
efficiency (doing things right) on the other. I say this is a mind-set—or
rather, an intention—because it’s impossible to achieve perfect minimalism.
No person can ever be perfectly effective and perfectly efficient in the way
they practice. But every person should at least strive to be.
To be a minimalist, you set hard and pressing deadlines. You don’t give
yourself any more time than you need, and in some cases you give yourself
dramatically less. For example, I would encourage you to imagine what you
would do—that is, how you would practice—if you only had an hour a day
to develop yourself as a generalist. What would you work to integrate? How
would you structure your reps? How would you add resistance? And more
important, what would you leave out? This exercise (even if it’s only
mental) is utterly useful because it forces you to pull the weeds out of an
otherwise cluttered practice plan.
An hour a day is not a lot of time. How would you fill that hour? With
what percentage of which efforts and of which skills? Would you strength
train for twenty minutes, play guitar for ten, write for fifteen, and meditate
for five? By examining and planning this one-hour scenario, you can makethe most of any set of skills—obviously in the above example we’re “short-
term” specializing in working out, since that’s getting the most attention.
But this isn’t to say you should only practice for an hour a day. Sometimes,
that may be the case. But other times, I hope you’ll practice for more. Either
way, it’s about applying pressure to establish priority, even if that pressure
is artificial. Once you establish those priorities, you can then stretch them
out. Figure out what you’d do for one hour first. Then do it for four.
Most of the time, this perspective will force you to work directly on the
project you want to finish. If you want to write a short story, restricting your
practice time will force you to spend most of your time writing that very
story, rather than diagramming sentences. Not that diagramming sentences
can’t be helpful, but is that really what you need to be doing right now? Get
your hand out of your pants! Or say you want to post a skateboard video on
YouTube. I don’t know enough about skateboarding to sound even halfway
intelligent about it, but I’d imagine if you only gave yourself an hour a day
to practice, this would force you to practice specifically just the tricks and
techniques you needed to nail in the video, and probably leave everything
else alone for now.
How you fill your hour will vary wildly because so much will depend
on what you’re trying to achieve at that point. If my goal is to record music,
that hour will look rather different than if my goal is to learn music. Start
with a clear vision of the end, restrict the amount of time you give yourself
to arrive, apply the principles of generalism, and get to work.
I can’t say that any of this is going to be easy—surely, it won’t be. But I
also can’t imagine you picked up this book because you wanted things to be
easy. I imagine you picked up this book because you want to be better, and
better at a lot of things. Being better doesn’t mean having it easy, and why
should any of us want to have it easy? Nobody who’s done anything and
achieved a status worthy of praise has had it easy—so easiness, smeasiness,
what kind of goal is that? Process and enjoyment of process are to be the
goal, and things can be challenging and we can still enjoy them. In fact, we
will enjoy them to the extent they are not easy, but meaningful. There is
nothing meaningful about doing work just to sit on the couch. But when we
start to see our progress take hold, when we start to rediscover ourselves
and reinvent who we are and what we thought we could do—none of that is
easy. It is fulfilling, though. When we get better at things and we combinethose things to increase our freedom and abilities of expression; to offer a
little chunk of ourselves, our personality, and our passions; to help people
and improve the planet; and to make life just a little bit brighter and more
simple and fun—again, none of that is easy. But it is meaningful.
I’ll finish with this: The greatest tragedy in life would not be to live
only a short amount of time, or catch a horrendous disease that turns you
into an astonishing case of disfigurement, like Joseph Merrick, whom you
may know as the Elephant Man. The greatest tragedy in life would be to
live a very long period and catch no horrendous diseases, but to miss the
very meaning of life itself, which is to develop virtue, to orient yourself
toward creative expression and “willing the good of the other,” and to know
and make and do good things. Love may be a simpler way to put it. Not
snuggly love but hugging-the-whole-world kind of love. That’s when you
know you’re getting better for the right reasons, that you’re improving in
ways that are themselves improving your soul. You don’t need every skill to
be able to do this, but you at least need some skills, and the pursuit of skills
under the right intention is something I feel is just indispensable.
Remember the reasons you got started or wanted to get started; think
back to those moments that first sparked your will to self-actualization.
Recall the person who exposed you to goodness and beauty and made you
want it, and hopefully that person inspired you in the same way E. B. White
inspired me, when I read why he spent so many hours developing his craft:
“All I hope to say in my books, all I ever hope to say, is that I love the
world.”
Now, as you make your way into the world, I want you to take this with
you: Help each other out. Don’t forget to call your mom. Hold the door and
smile at strangers. Drop some non-stale bagels off at the food pantry. Learn
as much as you can about whatever interests you. Be a solution maker, not a
problem starter. Don’t get caught up in too many arguments online. Try not
to judge. Chew with your mouth closed. Show that you are grateful for what
you have by—oh, I don’t know—leaving a five-star review for this book on
Amazon, maybe? Believe in something greater than yourself. Trust your gut
unless you’re a cannibal. Learn one new thing every day. Meditate. Stare at
flowers. Pet dogs. Go for walks in the rain. Wear footie pajamas, if you
want. And never say no to drinking a glass of wine (or tea) on the back
patio while catching the sunset with someone you love.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My deepest gratitude is extended to my wife, Christine. Her patience,
constant proofreading, and moral encouragement is what made this project
possible. I could not have done it without her.
I would also like to thank my indefatigable agent, Giles, for pursuing
this project with me, and finding for it a perfect home.
Finally, to all the staff at BenBella (particularly my editors Leah and
Scott), thank you for helping me shape this message into what it is. I am
under many obligations to all of you.APPENDIX: PROFILES IN
GENERALISM
DAVID BOWIE
For those who knew him as a child, it probably wasn’t overly surprising to
see where David Robert Jones’s ever-developing and robust skill set led
him: to become one of the world’s most recognizable and influential
musicians of the twentieth century.
Even as a young boy, David Jones, better known as David Bowie,
impressed choir teachers, headmasters, and schoolmates with his art and
design skills, inclination toward a variety of musical instruments, and poise
on stage. As the years went by, Bowie further developed each of his skills,
adding others to the mix, including songwriting and acting.
Stacking stagecraft, writing, design, acting, and musicianship, Bowie
created his famous alter ego Ziggy Stardust; he acted in various
productions, from theater to the big screen, and wrote some of the most
memorable songs of the 1970s and ’80s. His diverse set of skills set him
apart as one of the most iconic musicians and artists of his age and a
quintessential generalist.
DORIE CLARKDorie Clark didn’t set out to become an entrepreneur, author, speaker, and
consultant with a diverse set of skills and multiple but congruent revenue
streams. Instead, she started off as a student of theological studies and
philosophy. Moving on from that, she became a reporter, covering the
political landscape. Her experience there led her into becoming a
spokesperson for presidential candidates. Then she ran a cycling nonprofit.
She was also a documentary filmmaker.
Many of these initial career moves didn’t work out—Clark got laid off
as a journalist and her political candidates lost their elections—but she soon
learned that she could uniquely stack the skills she had developed to create
a new opportunity for herself and that she could make a profit by doing so.
Clark’s experiences became fuel for her ideas on how people can
reinvent themselves, become entrepreneurs, and get the most out of their
lives and livelihoods without risking anything more than necessary. She
mastered email and content marketing and became a regular contributor to
esteemed business publications such as the Harvard Business Review. The
books she has written showcase the writing, communication, and
storytelling skills she developed over the years. Her networking and
speaking skills led her to public speaking and conference gigs in which she
discusses her unique vision of reinvention and of capturing and capitalizing
on the entrepreneurial spirit; she provides something useful and new and
different to a marketplace already teeming with marketing consultants. And
without having taken any business courses or getting an MBA, she is an
adjunct professor at Duke University’s Fuqua School of Business and has
guest lectured at some of the most prestigious business schools in the
United States.
And as an author, consultant, marketer, professor, and business coach,
Clark has combined essential and nonessential skills in a unique stack.
“Generalists rule the world!” says Clark.
TERRY CREWSThe term linebacker might conjure images of a robust and muscled man, a
brute built like a wall with immense physical prowess but perhaps not much
in the way of mental or creative abilities.
Actor, artist, designer, writer, director, and retired NFL defensive end
Terry Crews defies that stereotype.
Crews initially went to college to pursue studies in art (he was even a
courtroom sketch artist in Flint, Michigan, for a spell), and even while
playing for the NFL, he supplemented his football earnings by producing
portraits of teammates and NFL-licensed lithographs.
After retiring from the NFL, Crews went onto to fulfill another passion
of his—movies. He cowrote and coproduced a film about the devastating
effects of drugs on young men in Detroit. He admitted the movie was awful,
but it was the start he needed. Soon came a move to Los Angeles, and then
over the years, roles in films and TV shows. Crews went on to write his
autobiography, detailing his life as a Christian, an addict, and a man who
overcame his darkest demons.
His skills stack surprisingly well on top of one another. His creative
artistry helps him in his Hollywood career. His physical abilities have
helped him in some of his physically demanding acting roles. And his
understanding of his own addictions and flaws contributes to the sensitivity
he uses to get into character and allows him to put himself in the shoes of
the audience, asking himself what would they want to see and then
performing it.
Terry Crews is a modern-day generalist, a man who found and
developed his skill set, then stacked it on top of his main passion, acting, to
become a household name.
DOROTHY DUNNETT
Scottish-born Dorothy Dunnett didn’t set out to revolutionize historical
fiction writing, but as her skill set would have it, she did.Dunnett began her career in the public relations field, acting as a press
officer for various government bodies. Midway through this career, she
began to pursue something a little more creative. Drawing on her studies at
the Edinburgh College of Art and the Glasgow School of Art, she often
accepted commissions for portrait painting.
In the midst of these dual careers, she met her husband, Sir Alastair
Dunnett, and had two children. However, it wasn’t until her late thirties that
the idea of writing even came to mind. When she lamented that she hadn’t
anything of interest to read, her husband suggested that she write
something. So she did.
But before the writing came the research, into which Dunnett dove with
vigor. She became a short-term specialist in the ages in which her books
were set, going so far as to develop a new historical theory regarding the
protagonist of Shakespeare’s Macbeth. But then it was on to the writing—
the depth of her characters and her understanding of the historical time
period in which they dwelt earned Dunnett international praise. When not
writing these historical fiction tomes, Dunnett stretched her creative writing
muscle and wrote lighthearted detective works.
Throughout her many years as a writer and artist, Dunnett also used
business, networking, and personal skills to advance Scottish culture and
the arts, serving the National Library of Scotland, the Scottish National War
Memorial, and the Edinburgh Book Festival. She was also an executive
director of Scottish Television and, along with her husband, was integral in
developing the Edinburgh Festival, the world’s largest arts festival.
Creative and personable, sharp and savvy, Dorothy Dunnett was truly a
generalist.
DAVE FREES
Dave Frees, estate lawyer, stand-up comedian, reporter, photographer,
author, tae kwon do black belt, dedicated family man, world traveler, and,
as Steve Forbes, editor in chief of Forbes magazine called him, “GrandMaster of communications and persuasion skills,” was told as a child by his
grandfather that he was an “unfocused dilettante.”
Even at the young age of nine, Dave would immerse himself fully in a
study or skill that fascinated him—geology, photography, anything—and
for months focus on that one thing until he was “good to great” at it. Then?
He’d move on to the next skill, the next study, working tirelessly to learn all
he could, or rather, as he got older, all that he needed to, in order to make
money from it. Because, as Frees says, money is a motivator, so if
somebody was willing to pay him, that must mean he was doing a good to
great job at whatever it was they were paying him to do.
As a young man, a local newspaper paid him to be a photographer. He
wasn’t so bad at writing so he offered to write articles to complement the
photos he took. As a reporter, he learned invaluable listening and
interviewing skills, and he learned how to tell stories. He was adventurous,
traveling the world with his college sweetheart turned wife and learning
languages, at least passably. He started companies through hard work and
tenacity.
These skills stacked one on top of the other so that wherever he went—
New Zealand as a Rotary exchange student at the age of sixteen, Australia,
Great Britain, the University of Pennsylvania Law School—he was able to
listen, truly listen, to people, engage with them, and connect with them.
They made him successful enough as a stand-up comedian. Now, with his
estate-planning clients, these skills help him alleviate tension during a
process that is usually somber and quite stressful. He uses his photography
skills to create and design images for his law firm’s marketing campaigns.
His writing and storytelling skills translate to effective marketing.
As Frees says, “To outsiders, this life looks chaotic and unfocused, but
to me it’s always been a rich tapestry of skill sets that fit together and serve
me well.” Indeed, they do, as they would for any true expert generalist.
DAN JOHNThese days Dan John is what I like to call a “master generalist,” a person
who exemplifies generalism by successfully combining seemingly
incongruent skill sets.
Dan grew up playing sports out on his neighborhood streets in South
San Francisco. Playing football for school was the dream, but a brush with
discus throwing helped steer him on another path, sending this Fulbright
Scholar to the weight room where he began lifting weights and putting on
muscle, a fortuitous move that shot him into All-American status in track
and field.
Unsatisfied with life only as an athlete, John pursued studies in religion.
He graduated college with a masters in theology and has gone on to teach
religious studies to adults both domestically and abroad.
John is the American record holder for the weight pentathlon and the
inventor of an exercise (have you ever heard of the goblet squat?), and a
philosopher, a professor of theology, and an author, as well. He’s also
fantastically personable, the type of father figure you’d want to have a
tumbler of whiskey with or invite to speak at your wedding.
John has successfully combined his skills of writing with strength
training and athletics to coach and influence an entire population of
professional athletes and amateur exercisers. His deep understanding of
religion, along with his people skills, critical thinking abilities, and
downright common sense, has helped him create his own philosophy, both
inside and outside the weight room, that has shaped his and countless
others’ lives, including my own.
HEDY LAMARR
Best known as a Hollywood bombshell of the 1930s and ’40s, Hedy Lamarr
wasn’t merely a pretty face on the big screen.
Though Lamarr got an early start to stardom in Europe in the early
1930s, it wasn’t until she fled the Third Reich and came to America that her
acting career blossomed. During this time, however, she devoted herself tomore than just scripts and screenplays. Along with composer George
Antheil, Lamarr invented “frequency hopping,” a way of avoiding signal
jamming by jumping around radio frequencies. This invention, for which
she was awarded a patent, helped form the technologies responsible for
Bluetooth, GPS, and Wi-Fi.
When Lamarr wasn’t “tinkering” or acting in films, she was a dedicated
charity fund-raiser, film producer, and writer. She relied on her various
skills to push her career forward, scratch the inventive itch, and become a
surprisingly adept generalist of the twentieth century.
SPENCER NADOLSKY
Dr. Spencer Nadolsky is a revolutionary voice in health care, focusing on
lifestyle changes rather than medications to improve his patients’ health and
doing so in a radical way—in a completely online clinic. He is an obesity
doctor, general practitioner, author, marketer, athlete, and, along with
myself and Somnath Sikdar, the cofounder of Strong ON! Dr. Spencer is
“the Doc Who Lifts.”
Growing up in small-town Michigan, Spencer was drawn to athletics so,
naturally, when he enrolled in the University of North Carolina–Chapel Hill
for exercise science and premed, he also went in for sports such as
heavyweight wrestling and did pretty well during his undergraduate tenure.
Then it was off to medical school and residency (and meeting the love
of his life, Jenna), all the while learning more about nutrition and keeping
up with his own fitness and health. He wound up on the path that most
doctors follow: working in an office, where the number of patients he could
help was limited by the number of hours in the workday.
But Nadolsky felt he could do more and that his purpose in life was to
help more people than a clinical setting would allow. So he began to branch
out, learning effective marketing skills (email and content marketing, in
particular) to build an online presence across social platforms. He wrote a
book called The Fat Loss Prescription based on the successes he’d helpedhis patients achieve as an obesity medicine doctor. He launched a line of
supplements. He speaks at countless seminars and conferences each year,
building his network and practicing his networking skills.
Then, in 2017, he took the leap and moved his entire practice online,
offering everything an in-person doctor could but doing it completely
online. This radical approach helps him do what he wants most—to help as
many people as possible and to spread the gospel of a healthy lifestyle. By
stacking his medical background with his athletic abilities; his creativity,
marketing, writing, and networking skills; and his business acumen, Dr.
Spencer Nadolsky has taken his medical practice beyond the clinic,
reaching thousands of patients, social media followers, and members of
Strong ON! and teaching them to live the best, healthiest lives possible.
And along the way, he has become an exemplary generalist.
LOU SCHULER
Whatever versatility Lou Schuler has, he’ll admit he just stumbled into it.
Schuler, a fitness journalist and author, often tells the story of how he
got interested in fitness: Growing up in Saint Louis, Missouri, he really
wanted to be good at sports but was consistently the slowest, skinniest,
weakest, and most four-eyed kid who showed up to play. That’s why he
started working out when he was thirteen. Both he and his older brother hit
the weights together and neither of them had any idea what they were
doing, but they kept at it until they got a little stronger and a little less slow.
Writing is another area where he thrashed around until finding his niche.
He wanted to write fiction and screenplays, but even as a teenager he knew
the odds were stacked against making a living as a novelist or screenwriter,
and he had no desire to go to a big city and starve or freeze to death while
he waited for his big break. So he decided to head to college and major in
journalism. As luck would have it, he went to the University of Missouri,
which has one of the best journalism programs in the country, without
paying out-of-state tuition.For ten years after college, Schuler bounced back and forth between
jobs at newspapers and magazines and stints where he focused on fiction
and screenwriting while waiting tables to pay the bills. By the time he got
his first job at a fitness magazine, in 1992, he’d been working out
consistently for twenty-two years, and for more than a decade he’d been
writing fiction and nonfiction for hours a day, virtually every day. So even
though he had written, at most, a half-dozen articles specific to health or
fitness, he’d knocked out hundreds about everything else, along with
thousands of pages of novels and screenplays. He’d even done some stand-
up comedy right after college. And now, with the rest of the world getting
more interested in fitness and nutrition, he found himself in the right place,
at the right time, with the right mix of technical skills, creative energy, and
sense of humor.
He still needed to develop expertise in fitness and nutrition, and that
was a struggle. Without a background in science beyond high school classes
in biology and chemistry, and knowing nothing about statistics, Schuler
dove into the science behind the fitness, and earning those credentials made
him “bilingual”: he was now fluent in English and geekish. The payoff? He
can interview a scientist without sounding like an idiot and then write an
entertaining article that a nonscientist can understand, weaving a story that
reflects the creative problem-solving skills of a fiction writer.
SOMNATH SIKDAR
The first time Somnath Sikdar, now a sixth-degree tae kwon do black belt,
walked into a martial arts facility, he was six years old, filled with visions
of ninjas based on the, at the time, newly released movie Karate Kid II. Of
course, back then, Som couldn’t know that he’d just become a student at the
very same facility he would, twenty-some years later, own.
But there were a lot of years—and a lot of skills to develop—in between
throwing his very first kick to becoming the owner of a martial arts facility
and an entrepreneur, publisher, business consultant, and marketer.Som continued to attend tae kwon do classes, becoming more and more
disciplined over the years. In the months leading up to a summer-long
vacation to India, he practiced extra each day so that he wouldn’t lose the
skills he’d already developed. Perhaps back then, he didn’t realize he was
developing the skill that would be most crucial to his entrepreneurial
success later on in life: discipline.
He earned his first-degree junior black belt at the age of nine, then his
second, and by the time he had gone off to college, he had already attained
his third dan. With his family’s encouragement, Sikdar attended the
University of Pennsylvania, where he earned a BSE in electrical
engineering and minored in systems science and economics. During his
college tenure, as well as afterward, Sikdar coached competitive tae kwon
do teams at the collegiate level. He even used his combative skills as an
extra in a martial arts film.
But Sikdar’s successes go beyond martial arts. He, along with two other
former peewee tae kwon do students, bought the Dragon Gym from their
former teacher, Master Chae Teok Goh. Only in his twenties, Sikdar had to
switch gears from the methodical perspective of engineering to its creative
perspective—learning how to effectively market his gym through email and
direct mail; increase class attendance; and broaden the gym’s offerings (he
added kettlebell training and Muay Thai classes, as well as yoga, physical
therapy, and massage therapy). But the skills in process management that he
developed in college and the discipline he developed throughout his
formative years served him well as he created and shaped the systems
necessary to run the business and improve the dojang he grew up in. He
published books on martial arts and kettlebell training. He markets, fills,
and hosts certifications and workshops each year and advises both local and
national business masterminds.
Along with myself and Dr. Spencer Nadolsky, Sikdar is a cofounder of
Strong ON!, and Dragon Gym is now the worldwide Strong ON!
headquarters. Sikdar’s expertise in running a brick-and-mortar martial arts
and workout facility makes him invaluable as a business coach and
consultant to the countless personal trainers and kettlebell instructors whom
we help through our Strong ON! franchise program. He is also the cohost of
a weekly online show, In Top Form, with another of our profiled generalists,Dave Frees. The show teaches viewers how to develop a diverse set of
skills to optimize their lives and livelihoods.
From a self-proclaimed “weak, small, and shy child” to an electrical
engineer, sixth-degree tae kwon do black belt, and entrepreneur, Som
Sikdar embodies the generalist—a person who can effectively blend and
stack a variety of skills to gain a competitive edge.
DONALD TRUMP
As the forty-fifth president of the United States, Donald J. Trump may be
the most polarizing of our case studies. But love him or hate him, he’s a
great example of a generalist.
After graduating from the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton
School, Donald Trump took over running the family real estate business, a
position he held from 1971 until 2017. While at the helm of the now-named
Trump Organization, he expanded the company’s role beyond the building
and managing of real estate properties, such as golf courses, casinos, and
hotels, and diversified into hundreds of side ventures.
Trump was heavily involved in various sporting events, from the
defunct New Jersey Generals football team to the hosting of Mike Tyson’s
1988 heavyweight championship fight. He even went on to be Tyson’s
financial adviser. He also owned stakes in the Miss Universe pageant and
ran the Trump University real estate training program.
Outside these business ventures, Trump has coauthored several books
and has made cameo appearances in movies and TV shows since the 1990s,
not including his role as executive producer and host of the wildly popular
reality shows The Apprentice and The Celebrity Apprentice, which aired for
fourteen seasons and inspired international spin-offs.
Then, in 2016, Donald Trump announced his presidential bid (politics
had been on his radar since the late 1980s), putting him in yet another field
entirely, one that called on all his past skill development to catapult him to
the forefront of a packed presidential race.The running and creating of business entities is Trump’s foremost skill
and the one he stacked all others on top of. However, a lot goes into
“running a business”—managerial skills, financial management skills, risk
mitigation skills, marketing skills, networking skills. Trump’s ability to get
as far as he did in both the public eye and the political landscape speaks to
his people and communication skills. The man also knows how to entertain
or at least, for better or for worse, how to hold people’s attention. These
wide-ranging yet congruent skills helped Trump create success over the past
forty-five-plus years, and all these skills culminated to help him win the
2016 US presidential election.
MARK TWAIN
Mark Twain—Samuel Langhorne Clemens—was a humorist, author,
performer, lecturer, inventor, publisher, and entrepreneur, and he was the
Great American Generalist.
While his legacy now places him squarely in the category of writer,
Twain came from a wide and varied background. Without this breadth over
depth approach, he would not have enjoyed the successes he did in life nor
would he have become the storied figure of history he is today.
Enamored with steamboats, Twain worked as a steamboat pilot for three
years until the Civil War forced him into other work. Fascinated by science,
he befriended Nikola Tesla and tinkered away in Tesla’s laboratory. Twain
obtained his first of three patents on December 19, 1871. Tempted by
adventure, he became secretary to the Nevada Territory governor, a silver
miner, and an overseas newspaper correspondent.
Talented in performing, he took to the stage, regaling audiences with his
adventures and delighting them with his quirky sense of humor. He became
the world’s first stand-up comedian, performing around the world in 1895
(to pay off his debts—money management wasn’t in his skill set).
Each and every one of his experiences, passions, and jobs at one time or
another stacked on his primary skill—writing. Steamboats and river lifefeatured heavily in his most famous works, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer
and Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. Science and technology were a focus
of his alternate history novel A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court.
And his travels were recounted and, much to the amusement of his
readership, stretched and poked and prodded to become hilarious and
poignant commentaries in Roughing It and The Innocents Abroad.
He developed his skill set over a lifetime, surging in some areas,
maintaining in others, to create a career and a legacy that surpass those of
any other American writer, then and now. Twain was the quintessential
generalist.
